national geographic headquarters street nw washington dc careers newsroom privacy notice sustainability policy terms of service code of ethics contact usnational geographic society is a organization. national geographic society. all rights reserved. pollution is the introduction of harmful materials into the environment. these harmful materials are called pollutants. grades subjectsbiology ecology health earth science geographycontents imagespollution is the introduction of harmful materials into the environment. these harmful materials are called pollutants. pollutants can be natural such as volcanic ash. they can also be created by human activity such as trash or runoff produced by factories. pollutants damage the quality of air water and land. many things that are useful to people produce pollution. cars spew pollutants from their exhaust pipes. burning coal to create electricity pollutes the air. industries and homes generate garbage and sewage that can pollute the land and water. pesticideschemical poisons used to kill weeds and insectsseep into waterways and harm wildlife. all living thingsfrom one celled microbes to blue whalesdepend on earth s supply of air and water. when these resources are polluted all forms of life are threatened. pollution is a global problem. although urban areas are usually more polluted than the countryside pollution can spread to remote places where no people live. for example pesticides and other chemicals have been found in the antarctic ice sheet. in the middle of the northern pacific ocean a huge collection of microscopic plastic particles forms what is known as the great pacific garbage patch. air and water currents carry pollution. ocean currents and migrating fish carry marine pollutants far and wide. winds can pick up radioactive material accidentally released from a nuclear reactor and scatter it around the world. smoke from a factory in one country drifts into another country. in the past visitors to big bend national park in the u. s. state of texas could see kilometers across the vast landscape. now coal burning power plants in texas and the neighboring state of chihuahua mexico have spewed so much pollution into the air that visitors to big bend can sometimes see only kilometers. the three major types of pollution are air pollution water pollution and land pollution. air pollutionsometimes air pollution is visible. a person can see dark smoke pour from the exhaust pipes of large trucks or factories for example. more often however air pollution is invisible. polluted air can be dangerous even if the pollutants are invisible. it can make people s eyes burn and make them have difficulty breathing. it can also increase the risk of lung cancer. sometimes air pollution kills quickly. in an accident at a pesticide plant in bhopal india released a deadly gas into the air. at least people died within days. hundreds of thousands more were permanently injured. natural disasters can also cause air pollution to increase quickly. when volcanoes erupt they eject volcanic ash and gases into the atmosphere. volcanic ash can discolor the sky for months. after the eruption of the indonesian volcano of krakatoa in ash darkened the sky around the world. the dimmer sky caused fewer crops to be harvested as far away as europe and north america. for years meteorologists tracked what was known as the equatorial smoke stream. in fact this smoke stream was a jet stream a wind high in earth s atmosphere that krakatoa s air pollution made visible. volcanic gases such as sulfur dioxide can kill nearby residents and make the soil infertile for years. mount vesuvius a volcano in italy famously erupted in killing hundreds of residents of the nearby towns of pompeii and herculaneum. most victims of vesuvius were not killed by lava or landslides caused by the eruption. they were choked or asphyxiated by deadly volcanic gases. in a toxic cloud developed over lake nyos cameroon. lake nyos sits in the crater of a volcano. though the volcano did not erupt it did eject volcanic gases into the lake. the heated gases passed through the water of the lake and collected as a cloud that descended the slopes of the volcano and into nearby valleys. as the toxic cloud moved across the landscape it killed birds and other organisms in their natural habitat. this air pollution also killed thousands of cattle and as many as people. most air pollution is not natural however. it comes from burning fossil fuelscoal oil and natural gas. when gasoline is burned to power cars and trucks it produces carbon monoxide a colorless odorless gas. the gas is harmful in high concentrations or amounts. city traffic produces highly concentrated carbon monoxide. cars and factories produce other common pollutants including nitrogen oxide sulfur dioxide and hydrocarbons. these chemicals react with sunlight to produce smog a thick fog or haze of air pollution. the smog is so thick in linfen china that people can seldom see the sun. smog can be brown or grayish blue depending on which pollutants are in it. smog makes breathing difficult especially for children and older adults. some cities that suffer from extreme smog issue air pollution warnings. the government of hong kong for example will warn people not to go outside or engage in strenuous physical activity when smog is very thick. when air pollutants such as nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide mix with moisture they change into acids. they then fall back to earth as acid rain. wind often carries acid rain far from the pollution source. pollutants produced by factories and power plants in spain can fall as acid rain in norway. acid rain can kill all the trees in a forest. it can also devastate lakes streams and other waterways. when lakes become acidic fish can t survive. in sweden acid rain created thousands of dead lakes where fish no longer live. acid rain also wears away marble and other kinds of stone. it has erased the words on gravestones and damaged many historic buildings and monuments. the taj mahal in agra india was once gleaming white. years of exposure to acid rain has left it pale. governments have tried to prevent acid rain by limiting the amount of pollutants released into the air. in europe and north america they have had some success but acid rain remains a major problem in the developing world especially asia. greenhouse gases are another source of air pollution. greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane occur naturally in the atmosphere. in fact they are necessary for life on earth. they absorb sunlight reflected from earth preventing it from escaping into space. by trapping heat in the atmosphere they keep earth warm enough for people to live. this is called the greenhouse effect. but human activities such as burning fossil fuels and destroying forests have increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. this has increased the greenhouse effect and average temperatures across the globe are rising. the decade that began in the year was the warmest on record. this increase in worldwide average temperatures caused in part by human activity is called global warming. global warming is causing ice sheets and glaciers to melt. the melting ice is causing sea levels to rise at a rate of millimeters per year. the rising seas will eventually flood low lying coastal regions. entire nations such as the islands of maldives are threatened by this climate change. global warming also contributes to the phenomenon of ocean acidification. ocean acidification is the process of ocean waters absorbing more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. fewer organisms can survive in warmer less salty waters. the ocean food web is threatened as plants and animals such as coral fail to adapt to more acidic oceans. scientists have predicted that global warming will cause an increase in severe storms. it will also cause more droughts in some regions and more flooding in others. the change in average temperatures is already shrinking some habitats the regions where plants and animals naturally live. polar bears hunt seals from sea ice in the arctic. the melting ice is forcing polar bears to travel farther to find food and their numbers are shrinking. people and governments can respond quickly and effectively to reduce air pollution. chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons are a dangerous form of air pollution that governments worked to reduce in the s and s. cfcs are found in gases that cool refrigerators in foam products and in aerosol cans. cfcs damage the ozone layer a region in earth s upper atmosphere. the ozone layer protects earth by absorbing much of the sun s harmful ultraviolet radiation. when people are exposed to more ultraviolet radiation they are more likely to develop skin cancer eye diseases and other illnesses. in the s scientists noticed that the ozone layer over antarctica was thinning. this is often called the ozone hole. no one lives permanently in antarctica. but australia the home of more than million people lies at the edge of the hole. in the s the australian government began an effort to warn people of the dangers of too much sun. many countries including the united states now severely limit the production of cfcs. water pollutionsome polluted water looks muddy smells bad and has garbage floating in it. some polluted water looks clean but is filled with harmful chemicals you can t see or smell. polluted water is unsafe for drinking and swimming. some people who drink polluted water are exposed to hazardous chemicals that may make them sick years later. others consume bacteria and other tiny aquatic organisms that cause disease. the united nations estimates that children die every day from drinking dirty water. sometimes polluted water harms people indirectly. they get sick because the fish that live in polluted water are unsafe to eat. they have too many pollutants in their flesh. there are some natural sources of water pollution. oil and natural gas for example can leak into oceans and lakes from natural underground sources. these sites are called petroleum seeps. the world s largest petroleum seep is the coal oil point seep off the coast of the u. s. state of california. the coal oil point seep releases so much oil that tar balls wash up on nearby beaches. tar balls are small sticky pieces of pollution that eventually decompose in the ocean. human activity also contributes to water pollution. chemicals and oils from factories are sometimes dumped or seep into waterways. these chemicals are called runoff. chemicals in runoff can create a toxic environment for aquatic life. runoff can also help create a fertile environment for cyanobacteria also called blue green algae. cyanobacteria reproduce rapidly creating a harmful algal bloom. harmful algal blooms prevent organisms such as plants and fish from living in the ocean. they are associated with dead zones in the world s lakes and rivers places where little life exists below surface water. mining and drilling can also contribute to water pollution. acid mine drainage is a major contributor to pollution of rivers and streams near coal mines. acid helps miners remove coal from the surrounding rocks. the acid is washed into streams and rivers where it reacts with rocks and sand. it releases chemical sulfur from the rocks and sand creating a river rich in sulfuric acid. sulfuric acid is toxic to plants fish and other aquatic organisms. sulfuric acid is also toxic to people making rivers polluted by amd dangerous sources of water for drinking and hygiene. oil spills are another source of water pollution. in april the deepwater horizon oil rig exploded in the gulf of mexico causing oil to gush from the ocean floor. in the following months hundreds of millions of gallons of oil spewed into the gulf waters. the spill produced large plumes of oil under the sea and an oil slick on the surface as large as square kilometers. the oil slick coated wetlands in the u. s. states of louisiana and mississippi killing marsh plants and aquatic organisms such as crabs and fish. birds such as pelicans became coated in oil and were unable to fly or access food. more than million animals died as a result of the deepwater horizon oil spill. buried chemical waste can also pollute water supplies. for many years people disposed of chemical wastes carelessly not realizing its dangers. in the s people living in the love canal area in niagara falls new york suffered from extremely high rates of cancer and birth defects. it was discovered that a chemical waste dump had poisoned the area s water. in families living in love canal had to abandon their homes. if not disposed of properly radioactive waste from nuclear power plants can escape into the environment. radioactive waste can harm living things and pollute the water. sewage that has not been properly treated is a common source of water pollution. many cities around the world have poor sewage systems and sewage treatment plants. delhi the capital of india is home to more than million people. more than half the sewage and other waste produced in the city are dumped into the yamuna river. this pollution makes the river dangerous to use as a source of water for drinking or hygiene. it also reduces the river s fishery resulting in less food for the local community. a major source of water pollution is fertilizer used in agriculture. fertilizer is material added to soil to make plants grow larger and faster. fertilizers usually contain large amounts of the elements nitrogen and phosphorus which help plants grow. rainwater washes fertilizer into streams and lakes. there the nitrogen and phosphorus cause cyanobacteria to form harmful algal blooms. rain washes other pollutants into streams and lakes. it picks up animal waste from cattle ranches. cars drip oil onto the street and rain carries it into storm drains which lead to waterways such as rivers and seas. rain sometimes washes chemical pesticides off of plants and into streams. pesticides can also seep into groundwater the water beneath the surface of the earth. heat can pollute water. power plants for example produce a huge amount of heat. power plants are often located on rivers so they can use the water as a coolant. cool water circulates through the plant absorbing heat. the heated water is then returned to the river. aquatic creatures are sensitive to changes in temperature. some fish for example can only live in cold water. warmer river temperatures prevent fish eggs from hatching. warmer river water also contributes to harmful algal blooms. another type of water pollution is simple garbage. the citarum river in indonesia for example has so much garbage floating in it that you can not see the water. floating trash makes the river difficult to fish in. aquatic animals such as fish and turtles mistake trash such as plastic bags for food. plastic bags and twine can kill many ocean creatures. chemical pollutants in trash can also pollute the water making it toxic for fish and people who use the river as a source of drinking water. the fish that are caught in a polluted river often have high levels of chemical toxins in their flesh. people absorb these toxins as they eat the fish. garbage also fouls the ocean. many plastic bottles and other pieces of trash are thrown overboard from boats. the wind blows trash out to sea. ocean currents carry plastics and other floating trash to certain places on the globe where it can not escape. the largest of these areas called the great pacific garbage patch is in a remote part of the pacific ocean. according to some estimates this garbage patch is the size of texas. the trash is a threat to fish and seabirds which mistake the plastic for food. many of the plastics are covered with chemical pollutants. land pollutionmany of the same pollutants that foul the water also harm the land. mining sometimes leaves the soil contaminated with dangerous chemicals. pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural fields are blown by the wind. they can harm plants animals and sometimes people. some fruits and vegetables absorb the pesticides that help them grow. when people consume the fruits and vegetables the pesticides enter their bodies. some pesticides can cause cancer and other diseases. a pesticide called ddt was once commonly used to kill insects especially mosquitoes. in many parts of the world mosquitoes carry a disease called malaria which kills a million people every year. swiss chemist paul hermann muller was awarded the nobel prize for his understanding of how ddt can control insects and other pests. ddt is responsible for reducing malaria in places such as taiwan and sri lanka. in american biologist rachel carson wrote a book called silent spring which discussed the dangers of ddt. she argued that it could contribute to cancer in humans. she also explained how it was destroying bird eggs which caused the number of bald eagles brown pelicans and ospreys to drop. in the united states banned the use of ddt. many other countries also banned it. but ddt didn t disappear entirely. today many governments support the use of ddt because it remains the most effective way to combat malaria. trash is another form of land pollution. around the world paper cans glass jars plastic products and junked cars and appliances mar the landscape. litter makes it difficult for plants and other producers in the food web to create nutrients. animals can die if they mistakenly eat plastic. garbage often contains dangerous pollutants such as oils chemicals and ink. these pollutants can leech into the soil and harm plants animals and people. inefficient garbage collection systems contribute to land pollution. often the garbage is picked up and brought to a dump or landfill. garbage is buried in landfills. sometimes communities produce so much garbage that their landfills are filling up. they are running out of places to dump their trash. a massive landfill near quezon city philippines was the site of a land pollution tragedy in. hundreds of people lived on the slopes of the quezon city landfill. these people made their living from recycling and selling items found in the landfill. however the landfill was not secure. heavy rains caused a trash landslide killing people. sometimes landfills are not completely sealed off from the land around them. pollutants from the landfill leak into the earth in which they are buried. plants that grow in the earth may be contaminated and the herbivores that eat the plants also become contaminated. so do the predators that consume the herbivores. this process where a chemical builds up in each level of the food web is called bioaccumulation. pollutants leaked from landfills also leak into local groundwater supplies. there the aquatic food web can suffer from bioaccumulation of toxic chemicals. some communities do not have adequate garbage collection systems and trash lines the side of roads. in other places garbage washes up on beaches. kamilo beach in the u. s. state of hawaii is littered with plastic bags and bottles carried in by the tide. the trash is dangerous to ocean life and reduces economic activity in the area. tourism is hawaii s largest industry. polluted beaches discourage tourists from investing in the area s hotels restaurants and recreational activities. some cities incinerate or burn their garbage. incinerating trash gets rid of it but it can release dangerous heavy metals and chemicals into the air. so while trash incinerators can help with the problem of land pollution they sometimes add to the problem of air pollution. reducing pollutionaround the world people and governments are making efforts to combat pollution. recycling for instance is becoming more common. in recycling trash is processed so its useful materials can be used again. glass aluminum cans and many types of plastic can be melted and reused. paper can be broken down and turned into new paper. recycling reduces the amount of garbage that ends up in landfills incinerators and waterways. austria and switzerland have the highest recycling rates. these nations recycle between and percent of their garbage. the united states recycles about percent of its garbage. governments can combat pollution by passing laws that limit the amount and types of chemicals factories and agribusinesses are allowed to use. the smoke from coal burning power plants can be filtered. people and businesses that illegally dump pollutants into the land water and air can be fined for millions of dollars. some government programs such as the superfund program in the united states can force polluters to clean up the sites they polluted. international agreements can also reduce pollution. the kyoto protocol a united nations agreement to limit the emission of greenhouse gases has been signed by countries. the united states the world s second largest producer of greenhouse gases did not sign the agreement. other countries such as china the world s largest producer of greenhouse gases have not met their goals. still many gains have been made. in the cuyahoga river in the u. s. state of ohio was so clogged with oil and trash that it caught on fire. the fire helped spur the clean water act of. this law limited what pollutants could be released into water and set standards for how clean water should be. today the cuyahoga river is much cleaner. fish have returned to regions of the river where they once could not survive. but even as some rivers are becoming cleaner others are becoming more polluted. as countries around the world become wealthier some forms of pollution increase. countries with growing economies usually need more power plants which produce more pollutants. reducing pollution requires environmental political and economic leadership. developed nations must work to reduce and recycle their materials while developing nations must work to strengthen their economies without destroying the environment. developed and developing countries must work together toward the common goal of protecting the environment for future use. photograph by dennis finleylight pollutionlight pollution is the excess amount of light in the night sky. light pollution also called photopollution is almost always found in urban areas. light pollution can disrupt ecosystems by confusing the distinction between night and day. nocturnal animals those that are active at night may venture out during the day while diurnal animals which are active during daylight hours may remain active well into the night. feeding and sleep patterns may be confused. light pollution also indicates an excess use of energy. the dark sky movement is a campaign by people to reduce light pollution. this would reduce energy use allow ecosystems to function more normally and allow scientists and stargazers to observe the atmosphere. noise pollutionnoise pollution is the constant presence of loud disruptive noises in an area. usually noise pollution is caused by construction or nearby transportation facilities such as airports. noise pollution is unpleasant and can be dangerous. some songbirds such as robins are unable to communicate or find food in the presence of heavy noise pollution. the sound waves produced by some noise pollutants can disrupt the sonar used by marine animals to communicate or locate food. how long does it last different materials decompose at different rates. how long does it take for these common types of trash to break down indoor air pollutionthe air inside your house can be polluted. air and carpet cleaners insect sprays and cigarettes are all sources of indoor air pollution. to soak up. chemical compound that reacts with a base to form a salt. acids can corrode some natural materials. acids have ph levels lower than. flow of acid or acidic liquid from metal mines or coal mines. precipitation with high levels of nitric and sulfuric acids. acid rain can be manmade or occur naturally. to adjust to new surroundings or a new situation. suitable or good enough. container of liquid material under high pressure. when released through a small opening the liquid becomes a spray or foam. the strategy of applying profit making practices to the operation of farms and ranches. the art and science of cultivating land for growing crops or raising livestock. harmful chemicals in the atmosphere. diverse group of aquatic organisms the largest of which are seaweeds. silvery reflective metallic element with the symbol al. region at earths extreme south encompassed by the antarctic circle. having to do with water. to choke or suffocate. layers of gases surrounding a planet or other celestial body. single celled organisms found in every ecosystem on earth. to prohibit or not allow. narrow strip of land that lies along a body of water. process by which chemicals are absorbed by an organism either from exposure to a substance with the chemical or by consumption of food containing the chemical. scientist who studies living organisms. physical disorder present at birth and not developed later. type of aquatic bacteria that can photosynthesize light to create energy. also called cyanobacteria and pond scum. growth of abnormal cells in the body. city where a regions government is located. greenhouse gas produced by animals during respiration and used by plants during photosynthesis. carbon dioxide is also the byproduct of burning fossil fuels. colorless odorless and tasteless gas that is slightly less dense than air. it can be toxic to humans. cows and oxen. chemical compound mostly used in refrigerants and flame retardants. some cfcs have destructive effects on the ozone layer. to move around often in a pattern. federal law protecting water from pollution. gradual changes in all the interconnected weather elements on our planet. visible mass of tiny water droplets or ice crystals in earths atmosphere. dark solid fossil fuel mined from the earth. place in the pacific ocean off the coast of the u. s. state of california that naturally emits gases such as methane a seep field. edge of land along the sea or other large body of water. to fight. measure of the amount of a substance or grouping in a specific place. to use up. to poison or make hazardous. substance usually a liquid or gas that reduces the temperature of a system or piece of machinery. tiny ocean animal some of which secrete calcium carbonate to form reefs. bowl shaped depression formed by a volcanic eruption or impact of a meteorite. agricultural produce. steady predictable flow of fluid within a larger body of that fluid. type of aquatic bacteria that can photosynthesize light to create energy. also called blue green algae and pond scum. toxic chemical used as an insecticide but illegal for most uses in the u. s. since. body of water where fish or other aquatic organisms no longer live beneath the surface due to natural or manmade pollution. area of low oxygen in a body of water. years. to decay or break down. oil rig in the gulf of mexico that exploded in. to go from a higher to a lower place. to destroy. nations with low per capita income little infrastructure and a small middle class. to disapprove or encourage someone not to do something. to throw away or get rid of. dull or boring. to make a hole using a rotating digging tool. period of greatly reduced precipitation. our planet the third from the sun. the earth is the only place in the known universe that supports life. having to do with money. to get rid of or throw out. set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and flow of electric charge. conditions that surround and influence an organism or community. to explode or suddenly eject material. gases and particles expelled from an engine. to eject or force out. one or more buildings used for the manufacture of a product. nutrient rich chemical substance applied to soil to encourage plant growth. to punish usually by charging an economic penalty or fee. or the penalty or fee itself. industry or occupation of harvesting fish either in the wild or through aquaculture. overflow of a body of water onto land. clouds at ground level. material usually of plant or animal origin that living organisms use to obtain nutrients. all related food chains in an ecosystem. also called a food cycle. ecosystem filled with trees and underbrush. coal oil or natural gas. fossil fuels formed from the remains of ancient plants and animals. liquid mixture made from oil and used to run many motor vehicles. to create or begin. mass of ice that moves slowly over land. to shine brightly. increase in the average temperature of the earths air and oceans. system or order of a nation state or other political unit. stone marking a persons burial place often engraved with the persons name and dates of birth and death. area of the north pacific ocean where currents have trapped huge amounts of debris mostly plastics. phenomenon where gases allow sunlight to enter earths atmosphere but make it difficult for heat to escape. gas in the atmosphere such as carbon dioxide methane water vapor and ozone that absorbs solar heat reflected by the surface of the earth warming the atmosphere. water found in an aquifer. environment where an organism lives throughout the year or for shorter periods of time. damaging. rapid growth of algae bacteria or other plankton that can threaten an aquatic environment by reducing the amount of oxygen in the water blocking sunlight or releasing toxic chemicals. the gathering and collection of crops including both plants and animals. danger or risk. group of solid and liquid particles in the air that makes it difficult to see. chemical substance with a specific gravity of at least.. organism that eats mainly plants and other producers. chemical compound made entirely of the elements hydrogen and carbon. science and methods of keeping clean and healthy. thick layer of glacial ice that covers a large area of land. to burn up entirely. activity that produces goods and services. not able to perform a task well. unproductive or barren. dark liquid used for printing or artwork. to contribute time or money. unable to be seen. body of land surrounded by water. to distribute give away or sell. winds speeding through the upper atmosphere. island in indonesia site of major volcanic eruption in. also called krakatau. international agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. body of water surrounded by land. site where garbage is layered with dirt and other absorbing material to prevent contamination of the surrounding land or water. introduction of harmful materials into the surface environment. the geographic features of a region. the fall of rocks soil and other materials from a mountain hill or slope. molten rock or magma that erupts from volcanoes or fissures in the earths surface. public rule. carnivorous or bloodsucking worm. new york town and the site of a former toxic waste dump. organ in an animal that is necessary for breathing. infectious disease caused by a parasite carried by mosquitoes. to spoil or damage. type of metamorphic rock. having to do with the ocean. wetland area usually covered by a shallow layer of seawater or freshwater. very large or heavy. person who studies patterns and changes in earths atmosphere. chemical compound that is the basic ingredient of natural gas. tiny organism usually a bacterium. very small. to extract minerals from the earth. process of extracting ore from the earth. large structure representing an event idea or person. political unit made of people who share a common territory. an event occurring naturally that has large scale effects on the environment and people such as a volcano earthquake or hurricane. type of fossil fuel made up mostly of the gas methane. chemical element with the symbol n whose gas form is of the earths atmosphere. one of many chemical compounds made of different combinations of nitrogen and oxygen. one of five awards established by the swedish businessman alfred nobel in. nobel prizes are awarded in physics chemistry medicine literature and peace. substance an organism needs for energy growth and life. decrease in the oceans ph levels caused primarily by increased carbon dioxide. ocean acidification threatens corals and shellfish. fossil fuel formed from the remains of marine plants and animals. also known as petroleum or crude oil. complex series of machinery and systems used to drill for oil on land. smooth dark coating on the surface of a body of water caused by an oil spill or leak. accidental release of petroleum products into a body of water either by an oil tanker or an offshore oil rig. circular pattern usually located near the antarctic of thin atmospheric ozone which absorbs harmful ultraviolet sunlight. layer in the atmosphere containing the gas ozone which absorbs most of the suns ultraviolet radiation. small piece of material. swiss chemist and businessman. large marine bird with a big bill. constant or lasting forever. natural or manufactured substance used to kill organisms that threaten agriculture or are undesirable. pesticides can be fungicides insecticides herbicides or rodenticides fossil fuel formed from the remains of ancient organisms. also called crude oil. place where oil or natural gas from the earths interior leaks to the surface naturally. an unusual act or occurrence. chemical element with the symbol p. chemical material that can be easily shaped when heated to a high temperature. single upward flow of a fluid such as water or smoke. substance that harms health. chemical or other substance that harms a natural resource. introduction of harmful materials into the environment. industrial facility for the generation of electric energy. animal that hunts other animals for food. american biologist and author. having unstable atomic nuclei and emitting subatomic particles and radiation. liquid precipitation. to clean or process in order to make suitable for reuse. to lower or lessen. any area on earth with one or more common characteristics. regions are the basic units of geography. distant or far away. available supply of materials goods or services. resources can be natural or human. to use again. natural substance composed of solid mineral matter. overflow of fluid from a farm or industrial factory. small loose grains of disintegrated rocks. frozen ocean water. base level for measuring elevations. sea level is determined by measurements taken over a year cycle. to slowly flow through a border. not very often. liquid and solid waste material from homes and businesses. process of removing harmful pollutants and contaminants from water discarded by homes and businesses so the water is safe for most uses. nonfiction book by rachel carson that documented the consequences of a polluted environment especially the use of the pesticide ddt. type of air pollution common in manufacturing areas or areas with high traffic. gases given off by a burning substance. top layer of the earths surface where plants can grow. to eject or discharge violently. piece of rock. severe weather indicating a disturbed state of the atmosphere resulting from uplifted air. system to empty streets of excess rainwater. storm drains flow into local creeks rivers or seas. body of flowing water. energetic or requiring a lot of activity. chemical element with the symbol s. greenhouse gas that can cause acid rain. toxic chemical made of hydrogen sulfur and oxygen. federal program to clean up hazardous waste sites in the u. s. also called the comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act. to live. large white mausoleum complex in agra india built by shah jahan for his wife mumtaz. small sticky piece of tar emitted by a natural or manmade oil spill that floats in the ocean and often washes up on beaches. degree of hotness or coldness measured by a thermometer with a numerical scale. rise and fall of the oceans waters caused by the gravitational pull of the moon and sun. the industry of traveling for pleasure. poisonous. movement of many things often vehicles in a specific area. type of large plant with a thick trunk and branches. strong thread made from at least two strings twisted together often made of plastic. powerful light waves that are too short for humans to see but can penetrate earths atmosphere. ultraviolet is often shortened to uv. international organization that works for peace security and cooperation. developed densely populated area where most inhabitants have nonagricultural jobs. depression in the earth between hills. huge and spread out. able to be seen. fragments of lava less than millimeters across. gas such as water vapor or carbon dioxide that is released into the atmosphere by a volcano. an opening in the earths crust through which lava ash and gases erupt and also the cone built by eruptions. introduction of harmful materials into a body of water. body of water that serves as a route for transportation. area of land covered by shallow water or saturated by water. organisms living in a natural environment. movement of air caused by the uneven heating of the earth by the sun. imagesinteractiveswebsitesthe audio illustrations photos and videos are credited beneath the media asset except for promotional images which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. the rights holder for media is the person or group credited. diane boudreau melissa mcdaniel erin sprout andrew turgeon mary crooks national geographic society tim gunther illustrator jeannie evers emdash editing kara west nancy wynne caryl sue national geographic society dunn margery g... exploring your world the adventure of geography. washington d. c. national geographic society. aug. for information on user permissions please read our terms of service. if you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation please contact your teacher. they will best know the preferred format. when you reach out to them you will need the page title url and the date you accessed the resource. if a media asset is downloadable a download button appears in the corner of the media viewer. if no button appears you can not download or save the media. text on this page is printable and can be used according to our terms of service. any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. you can not download interactives. in the united nations general assembly adopted sustainable development goals designed to transform our world by. the sixth goal is to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. according to the united nations one in three people live without sanitation. a lack of sanitation and sanitary waste management systems can reduce a communitys access to clean water and lack of access to clean water can allow diseases to run rampant sometimes creating epidemics of water borne infectious agents. learning about how freshwater systems work in the wilderness rural communities and urban centers can help us better understand the challenges of providing clean water and sanitation to people around the world. humans impact the physical environment in many ways overpopulation pollution burning fossil fuels and deforestation. changes like these have triggered climate change soil erosion poor air quality and undrinkable water. these negative impacts can affect human behavior and can prompt mass migrations or battles over clean water. help your students understand the impact humans have on the physical environment with these classroom resources. plastic is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. some plastics we can reuse or recycleand many play important roles in areas like medicine and public safetybut other items such as straws are designed for only one use. in fact more than percent of plastic is used only once before it is thrown away where it lingers in the environment for a long long time. it often breaks down into smaller and smaller particles called microplastics which can be ingested by both animals and people. fortunately there are things we can do to helplike stop using plastic bags straws and bottles recycling when we can and disposing of waste properly. use these classroom resources to teach about ocean plastics and check back for more coming later this year for the purposes of regulation the united states environmental protection agency identifies two broad categories of pollution point source pollution and nonpoint source pollution. air pollution consists of chemicals or particles in the air that can harm the health of humans animals and plants. it also damages buildings. watch this brief video picture of practice that captures everyday classroom life and provides real life examples of how students learn and think about freshwater topics. in the united nations general assembly adopted sustainable development goals designed to transform our world by. the sixth goal is to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. according to the united nations one in three people live without sanitation. a lack of sanitation and sanitary waste management systems can reduce a communitys access to clean water and lack of access to clean water can allow diseases to run rampant sometimes creating epidemics of water borne infectious agents. learning about how freshwater systems work in the wilderness rural communities and urban centers can help us better understand the challenges of providing clean water and sanitation to people around the world. humans impact the physical environment in many ways overpopulation pollution burning fossil fuels and deforestation. changes like these have triggered climate change soil erosion poor air quality and undrinkable water. these negative impacts can affect human behavior and can prompt mass migrations or battles over clean water. help your students understand the impact humans have on the physical environment with these classroom resources. plastic is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. some plastics we can reuse or recycleand many play important roles in areas like medicine and public safetybut other items such as straws are designed for only one use. in fact more than percent of plastic is used only once before it is thrown away where it lingers in the environment for a long long time. it often breaks down into smaller and smaller particles called microplastics which can be ingested by both animals and people. fortunately there are things we can do to helplike stop using plastic bags straws and bottles recycling when we can and disposing of waste properly. use these classroom resources to teach about ocean plastics and check back for more coming later this year for the purposes of regulation the united states environmental protection agency identifies two broad categories of pollution point source pollution and nonpoint source pollution. air pollution consists of chemicals or particles in the air that can harm the health of humans animals and plants. it also damages buildings. watch this brief video picture of practice that captures everyday classroom life and provides real life examples of how students learn and think about freshwater topics. national geographic headquarters street nw washington dc careers newsroom privacy notice sustainability policy terms of service code of ethics contact usnational geographic society is a organization. national geographic society. all rights reserved. join our community of educators and receive the latest information on national geographics resources for you and your students. byalina bradford february pollution is the process of making land water air or other parts of the environment dirty and not safe or suitable to use. this can be done through the introduction of a contaminant into a natural environment but the contaminant doesnt need to be tangible. things as simple as light sound and temperature can be considered pollutants when introduced artificially into an environment. toxic pollution affects more than million people worldwide according to pure earth a non profit environmental organization. in some of the worlds worst polluted places babies are born with birth defects children have lost to iq points and life expectancy may be as low as years because of cancers and other diseases. read on to find out more about specific types of pollution. land can become polluted by household garbage and by industrial waste. in americans produced about million tons of solid waste according to the u. s. environmental protection agency. a little over half of the waste million tons was gathered in landfills. only about was recycled or composted. organic material was the largest component of the garbage generated the epa said. paper and paperboard accounted for more than food was and yard trimmings were. plastics comprised about of the solid waste while rubber leather and textiles made up. and metals. wood contributed to. of the garbage glass was. and other miscellaneous materials made up about. commercial or industrial waste is a significant portion of solid waste. according to the university of utah industries use million pounds of materials in order to provide the average american family with needed products for one year. much of it is classified as non hazardous such as construction material and medical waste. hazardous waste is any liquid solid or sludge waste that contain properties that are dangerous of potentially harmful to human health or the environment. industries generate hazardous waste from mining petroleum refining pesticide manufacturing and other chemical production. households generate hazardous waste as well including paints and solvents motor oil fluorescent lights aerosol cans and ammunition. water pollution happens when chemicals or dangerous foreign substances are introduced to water including chemicals sewage pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural runoff or metals like lead or mercury. according to the environmental protection agency of assessed stream miles of lakes and of bay and estuarine areas are not clean enough for fishing and swimming. the epa also states that the united states most common contaminants are bacteria mercury phosphorus and nitrogen. these come from the most common sources of contaminates that include agricultural runoff air deposition water diversions and channelization of streams. water pollution isnt just a problem for the united states. according to united nations million people do not have access to clean water and around. billion do not have access to adequate sanitation. adequate sanitation helps to keep sewage and other contaminants from entering the water supply. according to national oceanic and atmospheric administration of pollution in marine environment comes from the land through sources like runoff. water pollution can also severely affect marine life. for example sewage causes pathogens to grow while organic and inorganic compounds in water can change the composition of the precious resource. according to the epa low levels of dissolved oxygen in the water are also considered a pollutant. dissolved is caused by the decomposition of organic materials such as sewage introduced into the water. warming water can also be harmful. the artificial warming of water is called thermal pollution. it can happen when a factory or power plant that is using water to cool its operations ends up discharging hot water. this makes the water hold less oxygen which can kill fish and wildlife. the sudden change of temperature in the body of water can also kill fish. according to the university of georgia it is estimated that around half of the water withdrawn from water systems in the united states each year is used for cooling electric power plants. in nearly all cases of this water is returned to its source where it can raise the water temperature in an area immediately surrounding the water discharge pipe. depending on water flow the water temperature quickly returns to ambient temperatures that do not harm fish. donn dears former president of tsaugust a not for profit corporation organization focused on energy issues told live science. nutrient pollution also called eutrophication is another type of water pollution. it is when nutrients such as nitrogen are added into bodies of water. the nutrient works like fertilizer and makes algae grow at excessive rates according to noaa. the algae blocks light from other plants. the plants die and their decomposition leads to less oxygen in the water. less oxygen in the water kills aquatic animals. the air we breathe has a very exact chemical composition of it is made up of nitrogen oxygen water vapor and inert gases. air pollution occurs when things that arent normally there are added to the air. a common type of air pollution happens when people release particles into the air from burning fuels. this pollution looks like soot containing millions of tiny particles floating in the air. another common type of air pollution is dangerous gases such as sulfur dioxide carbon monoxide nitrogen oxides and chemical vapors. these can take part in further chemical reactions once they are in the atmosphere creating acid rain and smog. other sources of air pollution can come from within buildings such as secondhand smoke. finally air pollution can take the form of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide or sulfur dioxide which are warming the planet through the greenhouse effect. according to the epa the greenhouse effect is when gases absorb the infrared radiation that is released from the earth preventing the heat from escaping. this is a natural process that keeps our atmosphere warm. if too many gases are introduced into the atmosphere though more heat is trapped and this can make the planet artificially warm according to columbia university. air pollution kills more than million people each year according to a study published in the journal of environmental research letters. the effects of air pollution on human health can vary widely depending on the pollutant according to hugh sealy professor and director of the environmental and occupational health track at the department of public health and preventive medicine st. georges university st. georges grenada. if the pollutant is highly toxic the effects on health can be widespread and severe. for example the release of methyl isocyanate gas at union carbide plant in bhopal in killed over people and over suffered respiratory problems. an irritant may cause respiratory illnesses cardiovascular disease and increases in asthma. the very young the old and those with vulnerable immune systems are most at risk from air pollution. the air pollutant may be carcinogenic or biologically active or radioactive. other air pollutants like carbon dioxide have an indirect impact on human health through climate change sealy told live science. even though humans cant see or smell noise pollution it still affects the environment. noise pollution happens when the sound coming from planes industry or other sources reaches harmful levels. research has shown that there are direct links between noise and health including stress related illnesses high blood pressure speech interference hearing loss. for example a study bythe who noise environmental burden on disease working group found that noise pollution may contribute to hundreds of thousands of deaths per year by increasing the rates of coronary heart disease. under the clean air act the epa can regulate machine and plane noise. underwater noise pollution coming from ships has been shown to upset whales navigation systems and kill other species that depend on the natural underwater world. noise also makes wild species communicate louder which can shorten their lifespan. most people cant imagine living without the modern convenience of electric lights. for the natural world though lights have changed the way that days and nights work. some consequences of light pollution are turning on so many lights may not be necessary. research published by international journal of science and research estimates that over illumination wastes about million barrels of oil per day and lighting is responsible for one fourth of all energy consumption worldwide. additional resourcesstay up to date on the latest science news by signing up for our essentials newsletter. thank you for signing up to live science. you will receive a verification email shortly. there was a problem. please refresh the page and try again. live science is part of future us inc an international media group and leading digital publisher. visit our corporate site. future us inc. west street floor new york ny. select pagea lot of factors like industrialization inefficient garbage disposal littering etc could cause pollution. a number of factories are set up near water bodies for the ease of operation and the waste produced by such factories as bumped into the water bodies. it is extremely harmful if the water is consumed or used. pollution is the contamination of the environment and atmosphere where do we live and make it unable to live in a healthy way. we have provided below short and long essays on pollution in english for your knowledge and information. after going through the essays you will know what pollution is and what are its main causes how to stop pollution its prevention etc. these essays will be helpful in your school college assignments of essay writing speech giving or paragraph writing etc. pollution refers to the presence of contaminants in the natural environment. some of the examples of polluting substances are gases like carbon dioxide carbon monoxide etc solid pollutants like plastic sewage etc and chemicals like fertilizers as well as those produced as byproduct in factories transportation etc. the immediate effect of pollution is that it renders earth s natural resources unusable or in other words harmful to use as well as it also causes species depletion and ecological imbalance. it is very necessary to take essential precautionary and pro active measures to prevent any further damage that will happen due to pollution to earth and its inhabitants. introductionpollution today has become a global concern for the health of the environment as well as the flora and fauna on the planet. pollution has a widespread effect on the environment including the natural resources. it makes the natural elements polluted and harmful to use ultimately making the life on planet suffer. what is pollution when a polluting substance enters into our natural environment and contaminates it this process is called pollution. these pollutants are mostly formed due to several human activities mostly economical in nature. to state few examples carbon monoxide released by transportation vehicles pollute the air trail of oil left by big ocean liners pollute the ocean and makes water harmful for aquatic life. conclusionpollution is the immediate threat that the environment faces today and is also the most prominent one. the clock is ticking continuously and with every passing moment the damage to the environment is increasing. immediate action to preserve the environment against pollution is needed to be taken by the government and other stake holders. introductionin a lay man terms pollution occurs when something unwanted enters into your natural environment. the release of toxic gas on burning of plastic is pollution mixing of harmful chemicals with the soil when it is mixed with chemical fertilizers is pollution when the disposed waste from your house somehow reaches into the open environment it cause pollution. similarly there could be several other examples of pollution. as for now we will discuss below the types of pollution. types of pollutionthe five major types of pollution are given below air pollutionits main source is the burning of fossil fuels by the transportation vehicles and smoke emanated from the factories. water pollutionits main source is the runoff water from urban settlements agricultural fields and release of byproducts from factories. soil pollutionsoil pollution could be caused from several factors like improper disposal of waste use of harmful chemicals in agriculture industry etc. light pollutionlight pollution refers to more than required presence of light in a polluted area which is large enough to interfere with the natural environment. noise pollutionnoise pollution refers to the presence of excessive noise generated by human activities like road transport vehicles jet planes a busy market loudspeaker announcements etc. conclusionwhatever may be the type of pollution it always has a degrading effect on the environment and human health or else affects one or the other living species on earth. light pollution confuses roosting birds often causing fatal accidents. introductiontoday the very existence of human life on planet earth along with the life of other flora and fauna is threatened up to a large extent by the pollution. pollution affects everything essential for survival natural resources species health etc. what is pollutionwhen any external unwanted substance generated by a human activity enters into the environment it causes pollution. causes of pollution are always human induced and the natural cause of pollution is almost negligible. there are a number of human activities those cause pollution. tons of toxic waste generated as a byproduct in factories is left into the rivers and streams polluting them thousands of cubic meters of harmful gases are released by transportation vehicles polluting the air improperly disposed waste from urban settlements got strewn on land and water resulting in land as well as water pollution. now that we have got an idea on what is pollution we will move on to discussing some of the significant effects of pollution. effects of pollution on environmentpollution has a widespread effect on the environment as discussed below polluted airpollution contaminates the natural air making it harmful to breathe. for example toxic gases released by transportation vehicles mix with the air resulting in its pollution. when this air is inhaled by a human or animal it causes severe respiratory ailments. some species of animals and plants which are highly sensitive to such kind of pollution die. polluted water bodiesimproper disposal of waste generated by areas of human settlements cause this waste to reach our naturally occurring water bodies in form of runoff. the urban waste consists of several toxic compounds including plastic. this waste is non biodegradable and stays in water making it hazardous to consume. it also results in the depletion of aquatic species population which are highly sensitive to pollution. soil toxicitypollution cause due to agricultural activities like the use of chemical fertilizers result in toxicity of the soils. chemical fertilizers are made up of harmful chemical compounds which got mixed with the soil ultimately making it toxic. it affects the species of flora as well as fauna those depend on the purity of the soil for their survival. species depletionone of the most prominent effects of pollution on the environment is the depletion of species. when polluting substances get mixed with our natural resources it harms the living species in some way or the other. gaseous pollutants cause severe respiratory ailments and decrease the life expectancy of the fauna and flora as well. global warmingglobal warming is one of the main effects of pollution which leads to a number of environmental effects. gaseous pollutants like carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide released due to the burning of fossil fuels stays in the atmosphere resulting in greenhouse effect. green house effect on the other hand is responsible for a number of factors like unexpected climatic changes resulting in droughts famine etc depletion in aquatic species like coral reefs fishes etc. conclusionthe effect of pollution on the environment is far and wide. not only the pollution effects present but also threaten the future of several species if no concrete action to prevent pollution is taken. the rate at which the pollution is being damaged is way too more than it could be repaired. it might take centuries to reverse the damages that we have done to the environment that too it won t be an easy task and will require strict discipline and will to tackle pollution. introductionpollution refers to the presence of unwanted substances know as pollutants in the environment. pollution is an immediate threat to the environment and causes severe damage to it. lately the world is recognizing the need to deal with the pollution if the earth and its biodiversity are to be preserved. what is pollutionpollution occurs when an unwanted external compound mainly generated due to human activities enters into the environment. these compounds are referred to as the pollutants and cause severe damage to the environment. everything that constitutes the part of the environment that is the water bodies air flora and fauna are in some way or the other get affected by the pollution. moreover pollution also causes global effects like greenhouse gas effects global warming and acid rain. global warming refers to an increase in earth s average surface temperature and results in conditions like famine flood and drought. below we will discuss about the effects of pollution on major indian cities like delhi noida ghaziabad lucknow and varanasi. it must be known that an aqi between to is considered good to is considered as satisfactory to is considered as moderate to is considered as poor to is considered as very poor to is considered as severe and a value above is considered severe plus or emergency. pollution level in delhias per a survey done by the world health organization the national capital territory of delhi stands at the lowest position in terms of air quality index among other major cities around the world. in delhi children are the worst affected and as per a study nearly. million or of all children are suffering irreversible damages due to poor air quality. air quality index of delhi remains usually moderate during january to september months. however the aqi rapidly deteriorates during the onset of winter months from october to december. often during these months the aqi reaches to a hazardous level of plus. the particulate matter levels of pm. and pm particulate matters in delhi reach up the level of micrograms m. this is much above the safe limit which is mg m for pm. particles and mg m for pm particles. burning of the roots of paddy crop during the winter months in the adjoining states of punjab and haryana makes the situation worst in delhi by causing dense smoke. this method is traditionally called parali and is one of the prime constituents of pollution in delhi. pollution level in noidanoida also known as new okhla industrial development authority located in the western uttar pradesh bordering delhi is immediately behind the national capital in terms of poor air quality. incessant construction works in and around noida in addition to the heavy vehicular pollution and cold winter air causes a dense thick smog. the term smog is used for a mixture of smoke and fog suspended in the atmosphere. the air quality index of noida also gets very poor up to the level of during the winter months of october to december. the particulate matter level of this western up district is by and large at par with that of delhi often the two competing with each other for the highest concentration of particulate matters. pollution level in ghaziabadghaziabad often tops the list of north indian cities with worst air quality index and pollution. here also like delhi and noida the aqi goes past the hazardous level of plus mostly during the months of october to december. the main reason behind such a poor air quality index of ghaziabad is industrial pollution and waste burning. the city is flanked by the industries on the outskirts which results in a dense smoke emanating from the factories as well as from the transport vehicles plying to the industrial area. the pm level of ghaziabad reaches up to four times of permissible levels during october to december. sometimes this value is reached during the deepawali festival due to the incessant bursting of crackers and smoke emanated from them. pm particulate matter which has a permissible limit of microgram m often is recorded nearing around micrograms m in ghaziabad. pollution level in lucknowthe air quality index of the capital of uttar pradesh lucknow fluctuates between moderate and poor often crossing the plus mark. though the situation is definitely not as bad as delhi ncr nevertheless it still is alarming and requires concrete action. the worst air quality index of lucknow was recorded as in the first half of the november month. the quantity of suspended particulate matter has also increased significantly in lucknow s residential areas since the last decades. the air of lucknow is found to be consisting of very fine particulate matters pm. with concentration just below microgram m which is very highly hazardous indeed. pollution level in varanasithe ancient pilgrimage city of varanasi has always been in news for its everyday fluctuating population of tourists. being the parliamentary constituency of indian prime minister mr. narendra modi since it has become the centre of development with everyday construction works of some kind or the other. though the construction is good for the city s development point of view it is also causing some of the worst recorded downfalls in its air quality. aqi of varanasi in is ranked at the third position on the world health organization s list of fifteen most polluted cities in the world. the people of varanasi are facing respiratory ailments and other complications due to the ever continuing construction work. recorded air quality index of varanasi reaches up to which falls in the poor category. the level of particulate matter found in varanasi is pm. the value of which fluctuates within the range of microgram m to microgram m which is extremely unhealthy for sensitive groups and children. conclusionindia is home to some of the world s most polluted cities whose position remains almost uniform though sometimes shifting a place up or down. cities like delhi noida calcutta mumbai and varanasi all have obtained a position among the world s most polluted cities. there is an immediate need to tackle the situation with strong will and determination. it is the time when government people industries all should join hands to tackle the pollution and prevent the health and environmental hazards caused by it. more essays on pollution pollution essay air pollution water pollution soil pollution noise pollution land pollution thermal pollutionpollution slogans air pollution slogans water pollution slogans soil pollution slogans noise pollution slogansmore on plastic pollution essay on plastic bag essay on plastic pollution why plastic bags should be banned essay plastic pollution causes effects and solutions why plastic bags are harmful for health related information speech on pollutionparagraph on pollutionarticle on pollutionessay on swachh bharat abhiyanessay on environmentslogans on environmentessay on pollution due to urbanizationessay on pollution and its effectsessay on pollution due to festivalsessay on pollution due to firecrackersessay on environmental pollutionessay on vehicle pollutionshare rate an entrepreneur. masters in computer application and business administration. a passionate writer writing content for many years and regularly writing for indiacelebrating. com and other popular web portals. always believe in hard work where i am today is just because of hard work and passion to my work. i enjoy being busy all the time and respect a person who is disciplined and have respect for others. october december december december featuring of essayfind all please help us to improve contact us. copyright white planet technologies pvt. ltd. all rights reserved. by garima gunjan i have written an essay on pollution. here we get info on what is pollution and its types air water noise environment global warming and climate change. pollution is introducing something into the environment that is dirty unclean or has a harmful effect on the ecosystem. related essays in english pollution is a key issue that has been affecting our earth. although it is an issue that has been prevalent since ancient times in the century its harmful effect has been felt on a large scale. although the governments of different countries have taken several major steps to curb these effects there is still a long way to go. several natural processes and cycles get disturbed due to this. not only that many flora and fauna today either have gone extinct or are endangered. due to the rapid increase in the amount of pollution animals are losing their habitat at a rapid speed. pollution has affected several major cities across the globe. a majority of these polluted cities lie in india. some of the most polluted cities in the world are delhi kanpur bamenda moscow heze chernobyl beijing among others. although these cities have taken several steps to curb pollution they still have a long way to go. the air quality of these places is poor and there are cases of land and water pollution as well. now it s time that the administration of these cities prepares strategies to check these issues. related ten tips on writing a good essay basically there are four types of pollution let s discuss the types of pollution one by one india has seen an increase in the number of vehicles on its roads. these are responsible for transmitting harmful gases such as sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide. these gases are responsible for reducing the quantity of oxygen in the earth s atmosphere. they also cause several breathing problems respiratory diseases types of cancers etc. related essay on terrorism the shortage of potable water is a major repercussion of water pollution. people are forced to drink polluted water due to which they get diseases such as cholera diarrhea dysentery etc. this in turn results in the breeding of mosquitoes which is a cause of many diseases such as dengue. all these factors are responsible for making the soil toxic. apart from that noise from the bursting of crackers functioning of factories music played on loudspeakers especially during the festival season also contribute to noise pollution. if not controlled it can affect the functioning of the brain as well. often the day after the festival of diwali it is reported in the media how the bursting of crackers caused an increase in noise pollution in major cities of india. although these are the four major types of pollution lifestyle changes have caused several other types of pollution as well such as radioactive pollution light pollution among others. if a place ends up getting light in excess or in an unwanted amount then it contributes to light pollution. nowadays several urban areas are facing unwanted glares in excess amounts. this is due to the fact that most indian cities such as mumbai bangalore delhi chennai etc. have an active nightlife. we are living in the nuclear era. since a lot of countries are developing their own nuclear devices it has lead to an increase in the presence of radioactive substances in the atmosphere of the earth. this is known as radioactive pollution. handling and mining of radioactive substances testing minor accidents occurring in radioactive power plants are other major causes contributing to radioactive pollution. related essay on demonetization global warming is another name for climate change. the blanket of pollution that traps the heat around our planet is the main reason why global warming is increasing nowadays. as humans burn fossil fuels vehicles emit harmful gases jungles burn at alarming rates all these factors are the main reasons. once it enters the earth s atmosphere eventually spreading across the globe. as a result heat gets trapped around the earth for the next or years after it starts emitting again. the worst part is harmful gases such as carbon dioxide have increased at an alarming rate. due to this the upcoming generation will feel the effects of global warming for hundreds of years. related essay on global warming the authorities at the national and international levels have taken several steps to curb the pollution issue. some of these are as follows related essay on digital india in english under its banner the uno in had initiated united nations environment program in order to address the issue of pollution. it has issued several issues such as climate change ecosystem management environmental governance resource efficiency etc. it has lead to several successful treaties such as the montreal protocol to limit the emission of gases that were thinning the protective ozone layer minamata convention to limit the use of toxic mercury etc. unep sponsored solar loan programme where lakhs of people from different countries were provided with solar power panels. although the authorities of different cities are working hard to curb the pollution issue however it is the duty of citizens and common people also to contribute to this process. few of the important ways to curb all types of pollution are pollution is a problem that we need to solve at the earliest so that humans can live safely on this planet. it is important that we follow the suggested measures to curb this issue. its our responsibility to make our place a better place for living. in order to make the earth survive we have to stop polluting it. recommended read essay writing in englishessay writing in hinditips to score in english paperten tips on writing a good essaysimple tips and tricks to score well in examinationstips for developing confidencequick exam tips and trickstips and tricks career question and answerstips for success in your careerexam preparation tipsexam stress management tips for parentsanalytical paragraph writing format examples samplesreport writing format how to report writing examples topics samples and typesletter to editor class to topics sample and exampleinformal letter format topics examplesarticle writing format article writing topics and examplesclass writing skills classified advertisement writing examplesletter to editor class to topics sample and exampleleave application for marriage format sample and examplesstory writing for class to format topics examplesjob application with biodata format topics examplesleave application format for office school and sampleessay on the importance of computers in our lifeessay on importance of discipline for success in lifeessay on terrorismessay on skill india missionessay on renewable sources of energyessay on make in india projectessay on haritha haram programessay on corruptionten tips on writing a good essayessay on my aim in life to become an astronaut essay on the importance of educationessay on beti bachao beti padhaoessay on importance of sports and gamesessay on demonetizationessay on pollutionessay on water conservationessay on global warmingessay on diwali in englishessay on holi in englishessay on chandrayaan in englishessay on women empowerment in englishessay on child labour in englishessay on swachh bharat missioncontributions of drdo in indian defenceactive and passive voice definition rules exercise and example sentencescountable and uncountable nouns meaning definition difference and examplesdirect and indirect speech format rules exercise and examplesdeterminers definition types exercise and examplesall about tenses tenses examples types of tenses in english grammarenglish vocabulary for bank po exams synonyms mcq videosnoun definition types exercise with examples in hindi and englishwhat is a verb definition types of verbs exercise and verbs examples in hindi and englishwhat is a preposition definition types exercise and examples in hindi and englishmodals definition modals exercise list of modals with examplesclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questionsclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questions class english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questions class english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english lesson explanationclass lesson explanationall india entrance examsstate entrance examscommon entrance testupcoming entrance exams top entrance exams after entrance exams for jobs after graduationentrance exams for commerce studentsentrance exams after graduationlist of entrance exams for teaching jobsentrance exams for railways recruitmentlist of entrance exams after graduationlist of entrance exams conducted by iitstop mass communication entrance examslist of entrance exams for arts students after graduationentrance exam dates indian army entrance exams pollution comes from all types of sources with various consequences. pollution is harmful to the natural world and human health. if youre environmentally conscious understanding the pollution basics can help you to minimize your contribution to pollution. air pollution is any contamination of the atmosphere that disturbs the natural composition and chemistry of the air. this can be in the form of particulate matter such as dust or excessive gases like carbon dioxide or other vapors that cant be effectively removed through the natural cycles of the carbon cycle or the nitrogen cycle. some of the most excessive sources of air pollution include depending on the concentration of air pollutants several effects can be noticed. for example polluted air results in smog increase higher rain acidity crop depletion from inadequate oxygen and higher rates of asthma in the human population. some scientists believe that climate change is also related to increased air pollution. according to the world health organization each year million people worldwide die from air pollution. who states the annually death rate from ambient outdoor air pollution is. million people worldwide. the organizations statistics also reveal an annual death rate from exposure to household smoke from fuels and dirty cookstoves is. million people. of the worlds population who reports that live where air quality exceeds the limits of the who guidelines. water pollution means any contaminated water whether from chemical particulate or bacterial matter that degrades the waters quality and purity. water pollution can occur in oceans rivers lakes and underground reservoirs. the pollution spreads from different water sources flowing together through the natural water cycle. causes of water pollution include the effects of water pollution include decreasing the quantity of drinkable water available lowering water supplies for crop irrigation and impacting fish and wildlife populations that require water of a certain purity for survival. one of the worst water contaminants is untreated wastewater from municipalities and industries. this type of pollution leaches into the soil and water. the united nations educational scientific and cultural organization reports on municipal and industrial wastewater contamination to world water supplies in various countries. for example in europe of municipal and industrial wastewater is treated but in latin america counties that figure is only. middle east and north africa statistics fall around whereas asia and the pacific region is between and. untreated wastewater is simply released and pollutes land water coastal ecosystems. its estimated that water from u. s. major rivers is used and reused more than times before it finally reaches the ocean. nineteen percent of u. s. households are connected to septic tanks for treatment and disposal of wastewater. the un statistics revealed. of the u. s. population was connected to wastewater treatment. soil or land pollution is soil contamination that prevents the natural growth and balance of the land. pollution can be present in land used for cultivation habitation or as a wildlife preserve. some soil pollution is deliberate such as the creation of landfills. however much of soil land pollution is accidental and can have widespread effects. soil pollution sources include soil contamination can lead to poor growth and reduced crop yields. wildlife habitats can be destroyed. water and visual pollution are often the result of soil pollution. other results include soil erosion and desertification. according to the conservation institute soil pollution is attributed to deforestation and soil erosion agricultural chemicals industrialization mining landfills and human sewage. the loss of topsoil is attributed to fertilizers and the use of pesticides in farming practices. these chemicals create a breeding ground for harmful and devastating fungi that lead to land erosion. noise pollution refers to undesirable levels of noises caused by human activity that disrupt the standard of living in the affected area. noise pollution can come from some noise pollution may be temporary while other sources are more permanent. effects may include hearing loss wildlife disturbances and a general degradation of lifestyle. early childhood development and education can be impaired from noise. the who reports that studies and statistics on children exposed to chronic aircraft noise suffer from impaired cognitive performance well being and moderate evidence of blood pressure and catecholamine hormone secretions are effected. the who reports environmental noise and its effect on human health. in the eu road traffic noise exceeds db with of the eu population exposed. suffer from exposure to more than db levels. more than are exposed to nighttime noise levels of more than db. the acoustical society of america reports that in only to americans were exposed to noise created by vehicles. that percentage in was.. radioactive pollution is rare but extremely detrimental and even deadly when it occurs. because of its intensity and the difficulty of reversing damage there are strict government regulations to control radioactive pollution. sources of radioactive contamination include radiation pollution can cause birth defects cancer sterilization and other health problems for human and wildlife populations. it can also sterilize the soil and contribute to water and air pollution. according to the u. s. nuclear regulatory commission of radioactive pollution is the result of natural sources while comes from anthropogenic sources. thermal pollution is excess heat that creates undesirable effects over long periods of time. the earth has a natural thermal cycle but excessive temperature increases can be considered a rare type of pollution with long term effects. many types of thermal pollution are confined to areas near their source but multiple sources can have wider impacts over a greater geographic area. thermal pollution may be caused by when temperatures increase mild climatic changes may be observed. swift changes make wildlife populations vulnerable and they may be unable to recover. thermal pollution can be seen as a result of various manufacturers. for example illinois state water survey reports the highest heat emissions worldwide are found in the mississippi river generated by coal burning power plants. the most polluted basin in the world from thermal pollution is found in europe the rhine river. light pollution is the over illumination of an area that is considered obtrusive. light pollution isnt just found in cities. much of the modern world suffers from light pollution. sources include light pollution can interfere with the normal sleep cycle. if it is near residential areas light pollution can also degrade the quality of life for residents. light pollution makes it impossible to see stars therefore interfering with astronomical observation and personal enjoyment. the national institutes of health reveals a growing body of work that suggests light pollution may have long term ill effect on humans and wildlife. exposure to light photons that hit your retinas can disrupt the circadian rhythm of humans and animals. another effect of light pollution is the inability to see the night sky. this is troublesome to astronomers and anyone wishing to enjoy star gazing. in the new world atlas of artificial night sky brightness reported that of the world resides under light pollution. in fact of the populations of the united states and europe live under skies of light pollution. more than a third of the worlds population is unable to see the milky way. this breaks down to north americans and europeans never see the milky way. visual pollution is more than an aesthetic eyesore or undesirable unattractive views. it can lower the quality of life in certain areas and have an economic impact on property values as well as personal enjoyment. sources of visual pollution include while visual pollution has a few health or environmental effects is the pollution that can have detrimental affects. most of the effects impact those living near or in this type of pollution. visual pollution presents a hazard and alters the community identity. for example visual pollution can be distracting while driving a vehicle or operating equipment and can lead to traffic congestion. the european scientific journal published a study in june called visual pollution can have a deep degrading effect on urban and suburban community a study in few places of bengal india with special reference to unorganized billboards. the study concluded that developed countries recognized and were taking steps to reduce visual pollution. the researchers concluded that in developing countries garbage is a greater nuisance and health problem than it is a visual pollution issue. personal pollution is the contamination of ones body and lifestyle with detrimental actions. this may include according to the epa personal pollution includes all types of pharmaceuticals and personal care products. the human and veterinarian products create trace environmental pollutants found in both surface waters and ground waters. personal pollution gained its own category but no studies have been made directly assessing personal pollution. however there are studies on various types of personal pollution such as turf fertilizers found in epa reports on nutrient pollution another type of pollution not commonly reported. the epa reports nutrient pollution is a challenge since it is a big problem that is spread throughout the u. s. excessive phosphorous and nitrogen discharged into the water and air is largely blamed on personal pollution or human activities such as fertilizers sewage discharge from treatment plants animal manure runoff pet waste and more. row crop runoff and animal feeding operations are a major cause. intertwined with other forms of pollution such as its carriers of air and water and personal pollution nutrient pollution impacts all of these areas as well as human health. water charged with nutrient pollution can generate algae that overcomes the water systems. shellfish aquatic and marine life suffer when they absorb the toxins created by algae blooms. eating contaminated shellfish or drinking water from this source can make a person very ill and in extreme cases lead to death. the mississippi river basin runs through states before it empties into the gulf of mexico. nutrient pollution effects this ecosystem. the epa reports in the united states littering is a form of pollution that can fall into several other types of pollutions such as personal visual water and soil. any type of waste or trash carelessly discarded without proper disposal is the definition of littering. this can include anything from fast food containers bottles paper and plastic packaging sales receipts electronic waste etc. the type of litter often determines the effect it has on the environment. for example some litter contains harmful chemicals that can find their way into water and soil. plastics can harm wildlife that either get trapped in plastic bags and die or marine life that consumes small pieces of broken down plastic. the leading national nonprofit keep america beautiful reports statistics on the types of litter in the united states. these figures show less litter in residential neighborhoods than along the roads. when it comes to convenience stores and commercial areas the surrounding roadways have more litter. keep america beautiful report on percentages of roadside litter and sources all types of pollution are interconnected. for example light pollution requires energy to be made which means the electric plant needs to burn more fossil fuels to supply the electricity. those fossil fuels can contribute to air pollution which returns to the earth as acid rain and increases water pollution. the cycle of pollution can go on indefinitely but once you understand the different pollution types how they are created and the effects they can have you can make personal lifestyle changes to combat poor conditions for yourself and others around you. air purifiers and humidifiers have different functions. air purifiers are clean indoor air but do nothing for indoor humidity levels. they remove dust and smoke from the air as well as allergenic substances like animal dander and pollen. humidifiers add water into the air but do not clean it. air purifiers and humidifiers have different functions. air purifiers are clean indoor air but do nothing for indoor humidity levels. they remove dust and smoke from the air as well as allergenic substances like animal dander and pollen. humidifiers add water into the air but do not clean it. they are used to relieve health issues from dry air and help reduce static electricity in the home. air purifiers remove particles and other pollutants from indoor air. there are two main types of air purifiers those that use mechanical filters to separate out particulate matter and those that use electrostatic methods to trap electrically charged particles. ionizers which produce negative ions create a negative charge on suspended particles which then settle out of the air and stick to the next surface they contact where they can be wiped up. some air purifiers were found to produce ozone which is implicated in producing inflammation of the respiratory system and worsening asthma symptoms. ultraviolet or uv air purifiers kill bacteria and other pathogens and are commonly used in hospitals and day care centers. uv light purification has also become available in residential hvac unitsmechanical air purifiers use filters to remove relatively large airborne pollutants such as dust and pet dander from the air. filters are often made from foam pleated paper or polyester or some other synthetic material. a high efficiency particulate air filter commonly known as hepa is capable of removing. percent of airborne particles. hepa filters can remove extremely small particles but can not remove odors. an air purifier may combine a hepa filter with a charcoal filter to help reduce odors. humidifiers add water to indoor air increasing the relative humidity of the indoor environment. dry winter air can cause chapped skin and contribute to respiratory problems. adding moisture to the air with a humidifier can reduce dry skin and decrease breathing problems including lessening coughs. adding humidity to indoor air can also reduce static electricity and prevent wooden furniture from cracking. four main types of humidifiers are ultrasonic impeller driven evaporative and steam vaporizers. ultrasonic and impeller humidifiers both produce a cool mist. ultrasonic models are quiet because they use ultrasonic waves to produce mist while impeller models use a rotating disk that can produce noise. evaporative humidifiers use a fan to evaporate water into the air and are also cold humidifiers. steam vaporizers create a warm mist by heating water with an electrical element. some models allow the mist to cool slightly before exiting the machine and are known as warm mist humidifiers. the standing water in humidifiers can become home to a wide variety of bacteria mold and fungi. when the humidifier is turned on these organisms can be released into your home s air and breathing them can cause lung problems and even infections. in the past disinfectants used with humidifiers have also created problems. minerals from the humidifier s water tank can be released into the air where they settle out as a fine white dust. humidifiers that use heat to evaporate water are prone to mineral build up on the heating element and the filters in evaporative humidifiers can also harbor bacteria and molds. you must keep humidifiers clean and you need to occasionally descale them to remove mineral build up. reviewed by tom iarocci m. d. karen s. garvin has been a professional writer since when dragon magazine published her first article. her recent work includes encyclopedia entries on historical subjects. she holds a bachelor s degree in communications and is pursuing a masters degree in european history. her interests include photography science history and steampunk. pollution refers to the addition of contaminating substances to the natural environment resulting in an adverse impact on the environment. pollution is human made and the level of pollution of the environment has increased with the rise in human population and developments made by the human civilization. pollution can be of different types depending on the part of the environment that is getting polluted or the type of pollutants contaminants causing the pollution. air water and soil pollution are the major types of pollution. however given the wide range of ways in which our species have managed to contaminate the environment we also have noise light radioactive thermal and plastic pollution. the different types of pollution have been discussed in greater details below. air pollution refers to the release of pollutants like toxic gases biological molecules and particulate matter into the atmosphere. the pollutants can be derived from several sources including both natural processes and human activity. volcanic eruptions limnic eruptions automobile and industrial effluents etc. are some examples of air pollution sources. carbon monoxide carbon dioxide chlorofluorocarbons aerosol sprays etc. are some examples of air pollutants. such pollution can be highly detrimental to the health and well being of all life forms on earth. in simple terms the contamination of water bodies likes lakes rivers ponds aquifers etc. by pollutants is called water pollution. like air pollution water pollution is one of the most harmful types of pollution. it can have extremely disastrous consequences for all living beings using the contaminated water. a major volume of the all the pollutants produced on land end up in water bodies. toxic wastes released by industries pathogens released in sewage harmful chemicals present in agricultural runoffs etc. are some of the top water pollutants. the contamination of water can lead to epidemics and even pandemics that can wipe out the population of an entire species or even more than one species. thus water pollution has a highly adverse impact on the environment society and economy of a place. when the soil of an area is contaminated it leads to soil pollution or land degradation. the soil is essential to the growth of all plants including crops. thus a degradation in the soil quality translates to lower yields and poor health of crops grown on such soil. industrial and agricultural chemicals are the common pollutants contaminating the soil. when the environment is filled with unnecessary or unpleasant sounds that are harmful to animals and plants it is called noise pollution. transport vehicles machinery industries loud music people yelling etc. are some of the most common sources of noise pollution. this type of pollution on the long term can give rise to chronic diseases like cardiovascular diseases. the psychological health of people can also be affected by noise. as the name suggests plastic pollution is caused by plastic accumulation in the environment. plastic a non biodegradable substance is extremely harmful to all life on earth. every year thousands of animals lose their lives due to plastic pollution. ingestion of plastics or entanglement in plastic objects kill these animals. most of the plastic waste generated in the world end up in the oceans where they cause great harm to the marine ecosystem. when radioactive substances are present in areas where their presence is undesirable or unintended it results in a type of pollution called radioactive contamination. such substances are highly toxic to all life on earth. radioactive substances trigger mutations in the genetic material of living organisms leading to different types of cancers. exposure to such toxins can also adversely impact the different systems of the body. death or disfiguration are common effects of exposure to radioactive waste. irresponsible management of such wastes or radioactive disasters are the common causes of radioactive contamination. the pollution of the night environment by anthropogenic light is known as light pollution. this type of pollution is caused by an excessive lighting of the streets flood lights used in stadiums lights used in an industrial area etc. the negative effects of light pollution include the spoilage of the aesthetic environment of a place creating disturbances in the ecosystem and also harming the health of living creatures. an induced change in the temperature of large volumes of water causes thermal pollution. this type of pollution leads to the degradation of water quality as the warm water does not provide ideal living conditions for aquatic flora and fauna. for example when water used as a coolant in power plants or that used in industries is released into a natural water body the warm or hot water mixes with the rest of the water to raise the overall temperature of the aquatic ecosystem. higher temperatures also alter the composition of dissolved elements in water. the flora and fauna living in the area that was earlier adapted to a particular temperature range can be killed by this abrupt change in the water temperature. thus aquatic life experiences a thermal shock due to thermal pollution. everyone loves to see clean and green spaces and beautiful vistas. when human activity installs ugly barriers to this vision of open and clutter free landscapes it is called visual pollution. the installation of billboards open storage of trash networks of electric wires crisscrossing each other above the street etc. create visual pollution. this type of pollution generates distraction eye fatigues diversity in opinions and other psychological problems. when waste products generated by humans is not disposed of properly it is called littering. here waste can include anything that is discarded by humans after use like bottles glass packaging material electronic waste metal waste etc. some of these pollutants like electronics batteries tires etc. are hazardous to the health of the environment. when chemicals from such wastes leach into the soil or enter the water bodies they cause soil contamination and water pollution. finally these chemicals enter the bodies of organisms to cause disease and death. all maps graphics flags photos and original descriptions worldatlas. comenvironmental pollution is currently the biggest challenge facing the word today. in the united states of rivers and of lakes are too polluted for fishing swimming and aquatic life. not surprising though when. trillion gallons of untreated storm water industrial waste and untreated sewage are being discharge annually into american waters. one third of the topsoil in the world is already degraded and with the current rate of soil degradation caused be improper agricultural and industrial practices and deforestation most of the world s topsoil could be gone within the next years. the great smog in killed people in london. this event was caused by a period of cold weather combined with windless conditions that formed a dense layer of airborne pollutants mostly from coal plants over the city. there are many sources of pollution and each one has its own effect on the environment and living organisms. this article will discuss the causes and effects of the different kinds of pollution. there are many causes of pollution including chemical pollution into bodies of water and soil through improper disposal practices and agricultural activities and noise and light pollution created by cities and urbanization as a result of population growth. air and noise pollution can have adverse effects on animals plants and humans. although air and water pollution has been improving over the last few decades they are still a large topic in the discussion today. there are two types of air pollutants primary and secondary. primary pollutants are emitted directly from their source while secondary pollutants are formed when primary pollutants react in the atmosphere. the burning of fossil fuels for transportation and electricity produces both primary and secondary pollutants and is one of the biggest sources of air pollution. the fumes from car exhausts contain dangerous gases and particulates including hydrocarbons nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide. these gases rise into the atmosphere and react with other atmospheric gases creating even more toxic gases. according to the earth institute the heavy use of fertilizer for agriculture is a major contributor of fine particulate air pollution with most of europe russia china and the united states being affected. the level of pollution caused by agricultural activities is thought to outweigh all other sources of fine particulate air pollution in these countries. ammonia is the primary air pollutant that comes from agricultural activities. ammonia enters the air as a gas from concentrated livestock waste and fields that are over fertilized. this gaseous ammonia then combines with other pollutants such as nitrogen oxides and sulfates created by vehicles and industrial processes to create aerosols. aerosols are tiny particles that can penetrate deep into the lungs and cause heart and pulmonary disease. other agricultural air pollutants include pesticides herbicides and fungicides. all of which also contribute to water pollution. nutrient pollution is caused by wastewater sewage and fertilizers. the high levels of nutrients in these sources end up in bodies of water and promote algae and weed growth which can make the water undrinkable and depleted oxygen causing aquatic organisms to die. pesticides and herbicides applied to crops and residential areas concentrate in the soil and are carried to the groundwater by rainwater and runoff. for these reasons anytime someone drills a well for water it must be checked for pollutants. industrial waste is one of the main causes of water pollution by creating primary and secondary pollutants including sulphur lead and mercury nitrates and phosphates and oil spills. in developing countries around of their solid waste is dumped directly into the ocean or sea. this causes serious problems including the harming and killing of sea creatures which ultimately affects humans. land pollution is the destruction of land as a result of human s activities and the misuse of land resources. this occurs when humans apply chemicals such as pesticides and herbicides to the soil dispose of waste improperly and irresponsibly exploit minerals through mining. soil is also polluted through leaking underground septic tanks sewage systems the leaching of harmful substances from landfill and direct discharge of waste water by industrial plants into rivers and oceans. rain and flooding can bring pollutants from other already polluted lands to soil at other locations. over farming and over grazing by agricultural activities causes the soil to lose its nutrient value and structure causing soil degradation another type of soil pollution. landfills can leach harmful substances into the soil and water ways and create very bad smells and breeding grounds for rodents that transmit diseases. noise is considered an environmental pollutant caused by household sources social events commercial and industrial activities and transportation. light pollution is caused by the prolonged and excessive use of artificial lights at night that can cause health problems in humans and disrupt natural cycles including wildlife activities. sources of light pollution include electronic billboards night sports grounds street and car lights city parks public places airports and residential areas. pollution affects the earth s land air and water by releasing pollutants in the air water and land. pollution ends up in these forms including dust smog and toxic gas emissions. in addition to the natural sources of pollution they can also come from human activity. these sources include industries such as mining manufacturing plants power plants oil refineries and transportation that release pollutants into the air or water. high levels of air pollution can cause an increased risk of heart attack wheezing coughing and breathing problems and irritation of the eyes nose and throat. air pollution can also cause worsening of existing heart problems asthma and other lung complications. like humans animals can suffer from a number of health problems due to air pollution including birth defects reproductive failure and diseases. air pollution causes a number of environmental effects in addition to the effects on humans and animals. acid rain contains high levels of nitric and sulfuric acids that are created by oxides and sulfur oxides released into the air by the burning of fossil fuels. acid rain damages trees and acidifies soils and water bodies making the water too acidic for fish and other aquatic life. nitrogen oxides released into the air by the burning of fossil fuels also contribute to the nitrogen responsible for toxic algae blooms. the release of man made compounds including hydrochlorofluorocarbons chlorofluorocarbons and halons formerly used as coolants foaming agents pesticides solvents aerosol propellants and fire extinguishers are depleting the ozone. the ozone layer in the stratosphere forms a protective layer that reflects harmful ultraviolet rays back into space that would otherwise destroy animal and plant life. water pollution is a serious threat to humans animals and aquatic life. the effects of water pollution depend on which chemicals are being dumped where. bodies of water that are near urbanized areas tend to be heavily polluted by dumbing of garbage and chemicals both legally and illegally by industrial plants health centers and individuals. by far the biggest consequence of water pollution is the death of aquatic creatures which can disrupt the entire food chain. pollutants such as cadmium mercury and lead are eaten by tiny aquatic organisms that are then eaten by fish and shell fish becoming more concentrated with each step up the food chain and causing serious problems in humans and wildlife. nutrient pollution can cause toxic algal blooms in drinking water sources that create toxins that kill fish and other aquatic animals. direct exposure to this toxic alga causes serious health problems in humans including neurological effects respiratory problems stomach and liver illness and rashes. a consequential problem is created when disinfectants used to treat drinking water reach water polluted with toxic algae they react creating dioxins. dioxins are extremely harmful chemical compounds that have been linked with reproductive and development problems and even cancer. nitrates caused by fertilizers also contaminate drinking water and according to the environmental protection agency babies who consume water that is high in nitrates can become seriously ill with blue baby syndrome which causes shortness of breath and blue tinted skin and can lead to death if not treated early. land and soil pollution has substantial consequences for humans animals microorganisms and aquatic life. contaminated land and soil can cause various problems on the skin respiratory problems and even different kinds of cancers. these toxic substances come into contact with the human body directly through eating fruits and vegetables that have been grown in polluted soils being consumed through drinking water that has been contaminated direct contact with the skin and breathing in air polluted with particles and dust. deforestation is the biggest concern when it comes to land degradation and soil erosion. clear cutting of vegetation and tree cover creates harsh conditions that destroy ecosystems and habitats. deforestation also creates an imbalance in atmospheric conditions reducing the amount of carbon that is naturally taken out of the atmosphere. this is a serious problem considering that most pollution created by people is carbon based. noise pollution can cause stress anxiety headaches irritability hearing loss and sleep loss resulting in decreased productivity. oil drills submarines and other vessels on and in the ocean can cause excessive noise that has resulted in the injury or death of marine animals especially whales. too much light causes eye strain and stress harming our eyes and decreasing our quality of life. light pollution also causes a decrease in the hormone melatonin that helps us to fall asleep resulting in restlessness and fatigue. many mammals insects birds and reptiles are photoperiodic meaning their movement mating growth and development and eating cycles are regulated by natural light patterns. light pollution can interfere with these natural behaviors and cycles causing a decrease in wildlife populations. pollution needs to be dramatically reduced because it is destroying the environment we live in contaminating our food and water causing diseases and cancers in humans and wildlife and destroying the air we breathe and the atmosphere that protects us from harmful ultra violet radiation. it is the responsibility of every living person to protect the environment and with the population ever increasing pollution problems are only going to get worse unless we do something about it. protecting the environment is a long and daunting task requiring continuous planning governmental policies and public and industrial participation. however the result of ignoring the problem will be catastrophic and life as we know it will begin to end. by decreasing waste implementing recycling policies banning dangerous agricultural chemicals and developing safe renewable energy we can significantly reduce the amount of pollution going into the environment annually and increase our quality of living. everyone is entitled to clean air to breathe water to drink and public lands to enjoy. if you have any ideas on how to reduce pollution please drop a comment and share your thoughts. recent postsecavo. com participates in the amazon services llc associates program. from time to time we may recommend a product for you to purchase for a specific purpose and will often link to amazon s website for you to easily complete that purchase. if you buy a product at amazon after clicking one of our links we may earn a commission. water bodies e. g. lake river ocean and ground water get contaminated due to discharge of pollutants in the water bodies without any treatment to remove harmful compounds. water pollution adversely affects not only aquatic plants and animals but it also affects human beings and ecosystems. water pollution is caused due to several reasons. here are the few major causes of water pollution sewage and waste water sewage garbage and liquid waste of households agricultural lands and factories are discharged into lakes and rivers. these wastes contain harmful chemicals and toxins which make the water poisonous for aquatic animals and plants. dumping dumping of solid wastes and litters in water bodies causes huge problems. litters include glass plastic aluminum styrofoam etc. different things take different amount of time to degrade in water. they affect aquatic plants and animals. industrial waste industrial waste contains pollutants like asbestos lead mercury and petrochemicals which are extremely harmful to both people and environment. industrial waste is discharged into lakes and rivers by using fresh water making the water contaminated. oil pollution sea water gets polluted due to oil spilled from ships and tankers while traveling. the spilled oil does not dissolve in water and forms a thick sludge polluting the water. acid rain acid rain is pollution of water caused by air pollution. when the acidic particles caused by air pollution in the atmosphere mix with water vapor it results in acid rain. global warming due to global warming there is an increase in water temperature. this increase in temperature results in death of aquatic plants and animals. this also results in bleaching of coral reefs in water. eutrophication eutrophication is an increased level of nutrients in water bodies. this results in bloom of algae in water. it also depletes the oxygen in water which negatively affects fish and other aquatic animal population. it is very important to prevent the polluting of water bodies and remove existing contaminants or reducing the concentration of these contaminants so as to make it fit for desired use. following are some of the ways of treating polluted water industrial treatment the raw sewage is needed to be treated correctly in a water treatment plant before it can be safely released into the environment. to reduce the amount and toxicity of waste it is passed through a number of chambers and chemical processes in water treatment plant. denitrification conversion of nitrates in gas is called denitrification. it is an ecological approach to prevent leaching of nitrates in soil. it stops ground water from getting contaminated. ozone waste water treatment ozone waste water treatment method is becoming very popular. in this method the pollutants in water are broken down by an ozone generator. ozone oxidizes bacteria molds organic material and other pollutants in water. septic tanks septic tanks are used to treat sewage at the place of location instead of treating it in any plant or sewage system. this system is used at the individual building level. the sewage is separated into solid and liquid components and treated separately. it s an old adage no water no life. we don t give much thought about using water cautiously even though it is the basis of our daily life. with the increasing scarcity of water everywhere it has become imperative to use water judiciously and conserve it as much as we can. with the lockdown being enforced about go in hyderabad the go is a government order that was issued in that followed the precautionary principle in order to protect the reservoirs mainly the drinking water requirement of hyderabad. the saddest part of the go is despite the protection of these lakes by the government the rapid urbanization and selfish attitude the nagpur municipal corporation is possible to make rainwater harvesting compulsory for all buildings occupied and driven by institutions. it is the first of its kind move proposed by the rainwater harvesting committee. a couple of days ago the committee carried a meeting at the nmc head office which was organized by mayor sandip while oil is one of the prime movers of the world economy the scarcity of water is likely to be one of the biggest challenges in the coming years. a large number of people including those in developing nations still do not have access to safe drinking water. the scarcity of pure drinking water is your details has been submitted successfully. the information provided herein have been collected from publicly available sources and is yet to be verified as per rera guidelines. read more.. the information sources used here include onsite interviews marketing material and other information sources on the internet. the information related to ownership of this property are also based on material gathered from public sources mentioned above or as has been declared to us by the owners person listing the property. these data have not yet been verified against authentic documents and are only indicative of the actual situation of this property project or land holding and their ownership. at commonfloor we provide this information to help our users find publicly available data in a structured format. we are in the process of connecting with the relevant owners and verifying the data as per the provisions of the real estate act. we will keep updating the information here regularly. while we believe that the information provided to you is correct on the basis of the data provided to us please consider this data and information as indicative and use your judgement and verify any information before making any decision. copyright commonfloor. com. all rights reserved. jump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. istockair pollution refers to the release of pollutants into the airpollutants which are detrimental to human health and the planet as a whole. according to the world health organization each year air pollution is responsible for nearly seven million deaths around the globe. nine out of ten human beings currently breathe air that exceeds the who s guideline limits for pollutants with those living in low and middle income countries suffering the most. in the united states the clean air act established in authorizes the u. s. environmental protection agency to safeguard public health by regulating the emissions of these harmful air pollutants. most air pollution comes from energy use and production says john walke director of the clean air project part of the climate and clean energy program at nrdc. burning fossil fuels releases gases and chemicals into the air. and in an especially destructive feedback loop air pollution not only contributes to climate change but is also exacerbated by it. air pollution in the form of carbon dioxide and methane raises the earth s temperature walke says. another type of air pollution smog is then worsened by that increased heat forming when the weather is warmer and there s more ultraviolet radiation. climate change also increases the production of allergenic air pollutants including mold and pollen. we ve made progress over the last years improving air quality in the united states thanks to the clean air act says kim knowlton senior scientist and deputy director of the nrdc science center. but climate change will make it harder in the future to meet pollution standards which are designed to protect health. the effects of air pollution on the human body vary depending on the type of pollutant and the length and level of exposureas well as other factors including a person s individual health risks and the cumulative impacts of multiple pollutants or stressors. these are the two most prevalent types of air pollution. smog occurs when emissions from combusting fossil fuels react with sunlight. soot is made up of tiny particles of chemicals soil smoke dust or allergensin the form of either gas or solidsthat are carried in the air. the sources of smog and soot are similar. both come from cars and trucks factories power plants incinerators engines generally anything that combusts fossil fuels such as coal gas or natural gas walke says. smog can irritate the eyes and throat and also damage the lungs especially those of children senior citizens and people who work or exercise outdoors. it s even worse for people who have asthma or allergies these extra pollutants can intensify their symptoms and trigger asthma attacks. the tiniest airborne particles in soot whether gaseous or solid are especially dangerous because they can penetrate the lungs and bloodstream and worsen bronchitis lead to heart attacks and even hasten death. in a report from harvard s t. h. chan school of public health showed covid mortality rates in areas with more soot pollution were higher than in areas with even slightly less showing a correlation between the virus s deadliness and long term exposure to fine particulate matter and illuminating an environmental justice issue. because highways and polluting facilities have historically been sited in or next to low income neighborhoods and communities of color the negative effects of this pollution have been disproportionately experienced by the people who live in these communities. in the union of concerned scientists found that soot exposure was percent higher for asian americans on average than for other americans. for black people the exposure rate was percent higher for latinos percent higher. a number of air pollutants pose severe health risks and can sometimes be fatal even in small amounts. almost of them are regulated by law some of the most common are mercury lead dioxins and benzene. these are also most often emitted during gas or coal combustion incinerating orin the case of benzenefound in gasoline walke says. benzene classified as a carcinogen by the epa can cause eye skin and lung irritation in the short term and blood disorders in the long term. dioxins more typically found in food but also present in small amounts in the air can affect the liver in the short term and harm the immune nervous and endocrine systems as well as reproductive functions. mercury attacks the central nervous system. in large amounts lead can damage children s brains and kidneys and even minimal exposure can affect children s iq and ability to learn. another category of toxic compounds polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are by products of traffic exhaust and wildfire smoke. in large amounts they have been linked to eye and lung irritation blood and liver issues and even cancer. in one study the children of mothers exposed to pahs during pregnancy showed slower brain processing speeds and more pronounced symptoms of adhd. by trapping the earth s heat in the atmosphere greenhouse gases lead to warmer temperatures which in turn lead to the hallmarks of climate change rising sea levels more extreme weather heat related deaths and the increased transmission of infectious diseases. in carbon dioxide accounted for percent of the country s total greenhouse gas emissions and methane made up percent. carbon dioxide comes from combusting fossil fuels and methane comes from natural and industrial sources including large amounts that are released during oil and gas drilling walke says. we emit far larger amounts of carbon dioxide but methane is significantly more potent so it s also very destructive. another class of greenhouse gases hydrofluorocarbons are thousands of times more powerful than carbon dioxide in their ability to trap heat. in october more than countries reached an agreement to reduce the use of these chemicalswhich are found in air conditioners and refrigeratorsand develop greener alternatives over time. though president trump was unwilling to sign on to this agreement a bipartisan group of senators overrode his objections in and set the united states on track to slash hfcs by percent by. according to david doniger senior strategic director of nrdc s climate and clean energy program the agreed to hfc phasedown will avoid the equivalent of more than billion tons of carbon dioxide over the next years. mold and allergens from trees weeds and grass are also carried in the air are exacerbated by climate change and can be hazardous to health. though they aren t regulated and are less directly connected to human actions they can be considered a form of air pollution. when homes schools or businesses get water damage mold can grow and can produce allergenic airborne pollutants knowlton says. mold exposure can precipitate asthma attacks or an allergic response and some molds can even produce toxins that would be dangerous for anyone to inhale. pollen allergies are worsening because of climate change. lab and field studies are showing that pollen producing plantsespecially ragweedgrow larger and produce more pollen when you increase the amount of carbon dioxide that they grow in knowlton says. climate change also extends the pollen production season and some studies are beginning to suggest that ragweed pollen itself might be becoming a more potent allergen. if so more people will suffer runny noses fevers itchy eyes and other symptoms. air pollution is now the world s fourth largest risk factor for early death. according to the most recent state of global air reportwhich summarizes the latest scientific understanding of air pollution around the world. million deaths were linked to outdoor air pollution exposures in and another. million deaths were caused by indoor air pollution. despite improvements in reducing global average mortality rates from air pollution the world s most populous countries india and china continue to bear the highest burdens of disease says vijay lamaye staff scientist at the nrdc science center. this report is a sobering reminder that the climate crisis threatens to worsen air pollution problems significantly if we fail to act to cut carbon pollution. a post shared by nrdc some four out of ten u. s. residents million peoplelive in counties with unhealthy levels of air pollution according to the state of the air report by the american lung association. since the annual report was first published in its findings have shown how the clean air act has been able to reduce harmful emissions from transportation power plants and manufacturing. recent findings however reflect how climate changefueled wildfires and extreme heat are adding to the challenges of protecting public health. the latest reportwhich focuses on ozone year round particle pollution and short term particle pollutionalso finds that people of color are percent more likely than white people to live in a county with a failing grade in at least one of those categories and three times more likely to live in a county that fails in all three. in rankings for each of the three pollution categories covered by the ala report california cities occupy the top three slots despite significant gains the golden state has made in the past half century. at the other end of the spectrum burlington vermont honolulu and wilmington north carolina consistently rank among the country s best cities for air quality. no one wants to live next door to an incinerator oil refinery port toxic waste dump or other polluting site. yet millions of people around the world do and this puts them at a much higher risk for respiratory disease cardiovascular disease neurological damage cancer and death. in the united states people of color are. times more likely than whites to live in areas with poor air quality according to the ala. historically racist zoning policies and the discriminatory lending practices known as redlining have combined to keep polluting industries and car choked highways away from white neighborhoods and have turned communities of colorespecially poor and working class communities of colorinto sacrifice zones where residents are forced to breathe dirty air and suffer the many health problems associated with it. in addition to the increased health risks that come from living in such places members of these communities experience economic harm in the form of missed workdays higher medical costs and local underinvestment. environmental racism isnt limited to cities and industrial areas. outdoor laborers including the estimated three million migrant and seasonal farmworkers in the united states are among the most vulnerable to air pollutionand also among the least equipped politically to pressure employers and lawmakers to affirm their right to breathe clean air. recently cumulative impact mapping which uses data on environmental conditions and demographics has been able to show how some communities are overburdened with layers of issues like high levels of poverty unemployment and pollution. tools like the environmental justice screening method and the epa s ejscreen provide evidence of what many environmental justice communities have been explaining for decades that we need land use and public health reforms to ensure that vulnerable areas are not overburdened and that the people who need resources most are receiving them. in the united states the clean air act has been a crucial tool for reducing air pollution since its passage in although fossil fuel interests aided by industry friendly lawmakers have frequently attempted to weaken its many protections. ensuring that this bedrock environmental law remains intact and properly enforced will always be key to maintaining and improving our air quality. but the best most effective way to control air pollution is to speed up our transition to cleaner fuels and industrial processes. by switching over to renewable energy sources maximizing fuel efficiency in our vehicles and replacing more and more of our gasoline powered cars and trucks with electric versions well be limiting air pollution at its source while also curbing the global warming that heightens so many of its worst health impacts. and what about the economic costs of controlling air pollution according to a report on the clean air act commissioned by nrdc the annual benefits of cleaner air are up to times greater than the cost of clean air regulations. those benefits include up to avoided premature deaths fewer hospital admissions for cardiac and respiratory illnesses and net economic benefits of up to. trillion for the u. s. economy every year. the less gasoline we burn the better we re doing to reduce air pollution and harmful effects of climate change walke says. make good choices about transportation. when you can walk ride a bike or take public transportation. for driving choose a car that gets better miles per gallon of gas or choose an electric car. you can also investigate your power provider optionsyou may be able to request that your electricity be supplied by wind or solar. buying your food locally cuts down on the fossil fuels burned in trucking or flying food in from across the country. and most important support leaders who push for clean air and water and responsible steps on climate change walke says. this story was originally published on november and has been updated with new information and links. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. to a college student who grew up surrounded by heavy truck traffic warehouses and commercial hubs in one of california s most polluted communities the push to electrify transportation is more than just urgent health policyit s personal. the global toll of premature deaths attributed to the burning of coal gasoline and diesel is breathtakingly high with new research doubling previous estimates. a new study shows that most of us humans are likely inhaling more air pollution each year. for years the clean air act has proved that health and prosperity go hand in hand. the landmark law is now under threat. david doniger senior strategic director of the climate clean energy program has helped shape federal and global climate related policies since he joined nrdc in. the trump administration failed to monitor air pollution in the toxic aftermath of hurricane harvey. also trump is taking a chainsaw to our protections and the epa can t count to. plus the solar industry pleads for mercy and the president says he thinks about climate change all the time. hmm. as greenhouse gasses fill the sky a progressive governor and worried residents take on oil and gasthe state s most powerful industry. also the self styled environmentalist in chief skips a climate summit and the epa s science advisory board misses a big big deadline. plus national parks are getting hazy and trump makes a quixotic bid to buy greenland. trump also kills years of child health research and continues to neglect chemical safety. the tireless efforts of locals are reshaping one of new jersey s most polluted areas. the air in southwestern indiana is bad enough without the emissions from yet another proposed polluter. ten years after the disaster at a tennessee power plant the cleanup crew is seeking justice. at the same time the trump administration is weakening protections for this toxic pollution. interior s bernhardt helped bury a damning pesticide report the clean air committee goes soft on soot and trump nominates a climate change denier to the fed board. trump s wildfire lies zinke s acronym defense and the epa s forced altruism involving truck pollution. everything you wanted to know about our changing climate but were too afraid to ask. so take it somewhere else says chicago s southeast side. residents who live near the country s busiest ports are getting a new lens on the pollution in their backyards and new tactics to help fight it. nrdc s gina ramirez is helping to bring attention to the wafts of manganese dust that plague her family and neighbors on chicago s southeast side. short answer yes. even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet. trump won t sign the g climate commitment pruitt doesn t have time for smog limits and zinke cancels science. as temperatures and carbon levels rise even breathing has become a challenge. here s what you can do to help clear the air. trump rolls back fuel efficiency standards while his epa chief celebrates the country s clean air. scientist kim knowlton monitors the inextricable connections between the planets fragile health and our own. since this giant salty lake in the desert lost its water supply its bird habitat has been shrinking and more toxic dust is wafting up from its dry lake bed. can the salton sea be saved considering making the switch heres everything you need to know about driving electric cars and hybrids. the new proposal would take us backward on climate tilt the grid toward coal and actually kill people. every time you go outside you may be inhaling harmful chemicals. but dont hold your breath. just use your head. so many technological innovations in the automobile industry stem directly from guidelines intended to reduce gas guzzling. if we lose these guidelines we ll also lose a lot of our workforce. roadside plants helped officials trace the source of a public health crisis and led to new standards for clean air in oregon. southeast side residents have been plagued by a heavy metal that s known to negatively impact the brain function of children. a step by step guide to protecting your community from dirty development projects. plus your one and only chance to save the clean power plan and steve bannon s role in the paris climate withdrawal. sometimes the best way to turn your anger into action is to pick up the phone. follow these tips to minimize your anxiety and maximize your impact. the epa lets states pollute other states air the atlantic coast pipeline fails and fails again to follow the law and ryan zinke actually says the government works for oil companies. but plans to cut local carbon pollution might help this asthma capital shake its wheezy reputation. a recent study found that the state is home to four of the country s most polluting power plants. but elected officials won t even show up to hear their constituents concerns about it. oil trains won t get better brakes air conditioners won t get safer chemicals and children lose their epa advocate. when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosureshelp save naturein this article we discuss the major causes of pollution in a bid to understand how we are contributing to environmental degradation directly or indirectly. in this article we discuss the major causes of pollution in a bid to understand how we are contributing to environmental degradation directly or indirectly. a study conducted in revealed that percent of deaths in the world are directly or indirectly related to air water and land pollution. basically environmental pollution is a phenomenon wherein certain pollutants are introduced in the environment either knowingly or unknowingly. this in turn hampers the balance of the ecosystem and triggers various environmental issues. the severity of pollution depends on chemical nature and concentration of these pollutants in the environment. there are different types of pollution the major ones being air pollution water pollution and land pollution. irrespective of which part of the world we are talking about each of these three types have different causes and therefore they have to be discussed individually. while pollution is caused by natural as well as man made sources it is the man made pollution which is adding to the severity of this issue and threatening the existence of life on the planet. to a large extent environmental pollution can be attributed to various human activities such as transportation industrial production construction mining agriculture etc. these activities which are technically referred to as the anthropogenic causes of pollution have been polluting the environment since ages. however the rate at which pollution is happening today we are left with no option but to take a serious note of it. air pollution is one of the major environmental problems in the world. the united states which constitutes for approximately percent of the world population alone produces percent of the total carbon dioxide in the world. among the leading causes of air pollution human transportation is by far the most prominent. millions of vehicles dump tons of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere every single day. other than these vehicles industrial plants which release various harmful gases by burning fossil fuels have a major share in polluting the air. it may come as a surprise for many but agricultural activities such as clearance of land for agriculture and use of pesticides also contribute to this form of pollution to a significant extent. water pollution is a broad concept which encompasses the pollution of inland water sources as well as ocean bodies on the planet. while inland water sources have been turned into virtual dumping sites owing to industrial pollution ocean bodies bear the brunt of marine transportation and oil spills. the amount of sewage waste generated by a single household may not seem much but if we take into consideration the fact that there are millions of households things become serious. a significant proportion of waste produced in these homes is directed to water sources without being subjected to proper treatment. other than sewage fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture also contaminate water. they make their way to water sources through surface runoff during precipitation. as for ocean pollution causes oil spills have a major role to play. the rising number of oil spills over the last few years is in fact a serious concern. land pollution also known as soil pollution is actually the process wherein soil is contaminated due to the introduction of some harmful chemical substances in it. among the various human activities which contribute to land pollution agriculture and mining are perhaps the most prominent ones. when it comes to soil pollution the list of contaminants includes chlorinated hydrocarbons chromium cadmium lead zinc etc. other than the practice of agriculture and mining dumping of industrial and domestic waste in the soil also pollutes it. the harmful chemicals which are suspended in the air get dissolved in rainwater and pollute the soil when they come to the earth s surface in the form of acid rain. similarly surface runoff transports contaminants from one place to another and adds to land pollution. owing to the interrelationship between these forms of pollution one can t afford to ignore their causes and effects. while many people are of the opinion that pollution is only caused due to chemical substances the fact is that even energy in excess can cause pollution. noise pollution and thermal pollution are the best examples of the same. if you are still not able to understand the seriousness of the issue maybe a closer look at its harmful effects will come as an eye opener for you. like it share it uncategorized our site includes quite a bit of content so if youre having an issue finding what youre looking for go on ahead and use that search feature there copyright help save nature buzzle. com inc. quail hill pkwy suite irvine ca there are many sources of pollution. anything which disturbs natural environment can cause pollution. much of pollution is caused by human activities although there are natural causes such as forest fires. humans are currently the main contributor to pollution of our planet. for example industrial waste in water bodies damages and disturbs the water life. excess noise from automobiles cities and airplanes causes noise pollution. to learn more about the causes of air pollution specifically see this answer. to learn more about the causes of water pollution specifically see this answer. to learn more about the causes of land pollution specifically see this answer. see below... pollution is harmful material released into the environment. one result of air pollution is acid rain. this occurs when exhaust from industries mixes with moisture in the air. this precipitation then falls as acid rain. it has damaged historic buildings bridges cathedrals and monuments across western europe. over the years acid rain has also damaged forests and freshwater lakes. categoriesair pollution is the presence of substances in the atmosphere that are harmful to the health of humans and other living beings or cause damage to the climate or to materials. there are many different types of air pollutants such as gases particulates and biological molecules. air pollution may cause diseases allergies and even death to humans it may also cause harm to other living organisms such as animals and food crops and may damage the natural environment or built environment. both human activity and natural processes can generate air pollution. air pollution is a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related diseases including respiratory infections heart disease copd stroke and lung cancer. growing evidence suggests that air pollution exposure may be associated with reduced iq scores impaired cognition increased risk for psychiatric disorders such as depression and detrimental perinatal health. the human health effects of poor air quality are far reaching but principally affect the bodys respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. individual reactions to air pollutants depend on the type of pollutant a person is exposed to the degree of exposure and the individuals health status and genetics. outdoor air pollution alone causes. to. million deaths annually making it one of the top contributors to human death. overall air pollution causes the deaths of around million people worldwide each year and is the worlds largest single environmental health risk. indoor air pollution and poor urban air quality are listed as two of the worlds worst toxic pollution problems in the blacksmith institute worlds worst polluted places report. the scope of the air pollution crisis is enormous of the worlds population breathes dirty air to some degree. although the health consequences are extensive the way the problem is handled is often haphazard. productivity losses and degraded quality of life caused by air pollution are estimated to cost the world economy trillion per year but along with health and mortality impacts are an externality to the contemporary economic system and most human activity albeit sometimes being moderately regulated and monitored. various pollution control technologies and strategies are available to reduce air pollution. to reduce the impacts of air pollution both international and national legislation and regulation have been implemented to regulate air pollution. local laws where well enforced have led to strong public health improvements. at the international level some of these efforts have been successful for example the montreal protocol was successful at reducing release of harmful ozone depleting chemicals or the helsinki protocol which reduced sulfur emissions while other attempts have so far been less successful in implementation such as international action on climate change. an air pollutant is a material in the air that can have adverse effects on humans and the ecosystem. the substance can be solid particles liquid droplets or gases. a pollutant can be of natural origin or man made. pollutants are classified as primary or secondary. primary pollutants are usually produced by processes such as ash from a volcanic eruption. other examples include carbon monoxide gas from motor vehicle exhausts or sulfur dioxide released from factories. secondary pollutants are not emitted directly. rather they form in the air when primary pollutants react or interact. ground level ozone is a prominent example of a secondary pollutant. some pollutants may be both primary and secondary they are both emitted directly and formed from other primary pollutants. pollutants emitted into the atmosphere by human activity include secondary pollutants include minor air pollutants include persistent organic pollutants are organic compounds that are resistant to environmental degradation through chemical biological and photolytic processes. because of this they have been observed to persist in the environment to be capable of long range transport bioaccumulate in human and animal tissue biomagnify in food chains and to have potentially significant impacts on human health and the environment. these are mostly related to the burning of fuel. there are also sources from processes other than combustion air pollutant emission factors are reported representative values that attempt to relate the quantity of a pollutant released to the ambient air with an activity associated with the release of that pollutant. these factors are usually expressed as the weight of pollutant divided by a unit weight volume distance or duration of the activity emitting the pollutant. such factors facilitate estimation of emissions from various sources of air pollution. in most cases these factors are simply averages of all available data of acceptable quality and are generally assumed to be representative of long term averages. there are compounds in the list of persistent organic pollutants. dioxins and furans are two of them and intentionally created by combustion of organics like open burning of plastics. these compounds are also endocrine disruptors and can mutate the human genes. the united states environmental protection agency has published a compilation of air pollutant emission factors for a wide range of industrial sources. the united kingdom australia canada and many other countries have published similar compilations as well as the european environment agency. air pollution risk is a function of the hazard of the pollutant and the exposure to that pollutant. air pollution exposure can be expressed for an individual for certain groups or for entire populations. for example one may want to calculate the exposure to a hazardous air pollutant for a geographic area which includes the various microenvironments and age groups. this can be calculated as an inhalation exposure. this would account for daily exposure in various settings. the exposure needs to include different age and other demographic groups especially infants children pregnant women and other sensitive subpopulations. the exposure to an air pollutant must integrate the concentrations of the air pollutant with respect to the time spent in each setting and the respective inhalation rates for each subgroup for each specific time that the subgroup is in the setting and engaged in particular activities. for example a small childs inhalation rate will be less than that of an adult. a child engaged in vigorous exercise will have a higher respiration rate than the same child in a sedentary activity. the daily exposure then needs to reflect the time spent in each micro environmental setting and the type of activities in these settings. the air pollutant concentration in each microactivity microenvironmental setting is summed to indicate the exposure. for some pollutants such as black carbon traffic related exposures may dominate total exposure despite short exposure times since high concentrations coincide with proximity to major roads or participation to traffic. a large portion of total daily exposure occurs as short peaks of high concentrations but it remains unclear how to define peaks and determine their frequency and health impact. in the who halved its recommended guideline limit for tiny particles from burning fossil fuels. the new limit for nitrogen dioxide is lower. a lack of ventilation indoors concentrates air pollution where people often spend the majority of their time. radon gas a carcinogen is exuded from the earth in certain locations and trapped inside houses. building materials including carpeting and plywood emit formaldehyde gas. paint and solvents give off volatile organic compounds as they dry. lead paint can degenerate into dust and be inhaled. intentional air pollution is introduced with the use of air fresheners incense and other scented items. controlled wood fires in cook stoves and fireplaces can add significant amounts of harmful smoke particulates into the air inside and out. indoor pollution fatalities may be caused by using pesticides and other chemical sprays indoors without proper ventilation. carbon monoxide poisoning and fatalities are often caused by faulty vents and chimneys or by the burning of charcoal indoors or in a confined space such as a tent. chronic carbon monoxide poisoning can result even from poorly adjusted pilot lights. traps are built into all domestic plumbing to keep sewer gas and hydrogen sulfide out of interiors. clothing emits tetrachloroethylene or other dry cleaning fluids for days after dry cleaning. though its use has now been banned in many countries the extensive use of asbestos in industrial and domestic environments in the past has left a potentially very dangerous material in many localities. asbestosis is a chronic inflammatory medical condition affecting the tissue of the lungs. it occurs after long term heavy exposure to asbestos from asbestos containing materials in structures. sufferers have severe dyspnea and are at an increased risk regarding several different types of lung cancer. as clear explanations are not always stressed in non technical literature care should be taken to distinguish between several forms of relevant diseases. according to the world health organization these may be defined as asbestosis lung cancer and peritoneal mesothelioma. biological sources of air pollution are also found indoors as gases and airborne particulates. pets produce dander people produce dust from minute skin flakes and decomposed hair dust mites in bedding carpeting and furniture produce enzymes and micrometre sized fecal droppings inhabitants emit methane mold forms on walls and generates mycotoxins and spores air conditioning systems can incubate legionnaires disease and mold and houseplants soil and surrounding gardens can produce pollen dust and mold. indoors the lack of air circulation allows these airborne pollutants to accumulate more than they would otherwise occur in nature. even at levels lower than those considered safe by united states regulators exposure to three components of air pollution fine particulate matter nitrogen dioxide and ozone correlates with cardiac and respiratory illness. in air pollution caused one in eight deaths in europe and was a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related diseases including respiratory infections heart disease copd stroke and lung cancer. the health effects caused by air pollution may include difficulty in breathing wheezing coughing asthma and worsening of existing respiratory and cardiac conditions. these effects can result in increased medication use increased doctor or emergency department visits more hospital admissions and premature death. the human health effects of poor air quality are far reaching but principally affect the bodys respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. individual reactions to air pollutants depend on the type of pollutant a person is exposed to the degree of exposure and the individuals health status and genetics. the most common sources of air pollution include particulates ozone nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. children aged less than five years who live in developing countries are the most vulnerable population in terms of total deaths attributable to indoor and outdoor air pollution. the world health organization estimated in that every year air pollution causes the premature death of some million people worldwide. studies published in march indicated that the number may be around. million. india has the highest death rate due to air pollution. india also has more deaths from asthma than any other nation according to the world health organization. in december air pollution was estimated to kill people in china each year. there is a positive correlation between pneumonia related deaths and air pollution from motor vehicle emissions. annual premature european deaths caused by air pollution are estimated at an important cause of these deaths is nitrogen dioxide and other nitrogen oxides emitted by road vehicles. in a consultation document the uk government disclosed that nitrogen dioxide is responsible for premature uk deaths per annum. across the european union air pollution is estimated to reduce life expectancy by almost nine months. causes of deaths include strokes heart disease copd lung cancer and lung infections. urban outdoor air pollution is estimated to cause. million deaths worldwide per year. children are particularly at risk due to the immaturity of their respiratory organ systems. the us epa estimated in that a proposed set of changes in diesel engine technology could result in fewer premature mortalities fewer heart attacks fewer emergency department visits by children with asthma and fewer respiratory related hospital admissions each year in the united states. the us epa has estimated that limiting ground level ozone concentration to parts per billion would avert to premature deaths nationwide in compared with the ppb standard. the agency projected the more protective standard would also prevent an additional cases of aggravated asthma and more than a million cases of missed work or school. following this assessment the epa acted to protect public health by lowering the national ambient air quality standards for ground level ozone to parts per billion. a new economic study of the health impacts and associated costs of air pollution in the los angeles basin and san joaquin valley of southern california shows that more than people die prematurely each year because air pollution levels violate federal standards. the number of annual premature deaths is considerably higher than the fatalities related to auto collisions in the same area which average fewer than per year. a study found that outdoor air pollution is associated with substantially increased mortality even at low pollution levels below the current european and north american standards and who guideline values shortly before the who adjusted its guidelines. the largest cause is air pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion mostly the production and use of cars electricity production and heating. needed diesel exhaust is a major contributor to combustion derived particulate matter air pollution. in several human experimental studies using a well validated exposure chamber setup de has been linked to acute vascular dysfunction and increased thrombus formation. the mechanisms linking air pollution to increased cardiovascular mortality are uncertain but probably include pulmonary and systemic inflammation. a study by greenpeace estimates there are. million annual premature deaths worldwide because of pollutants released by high emission power stations and vehicle exhausts deaths occur in the middle east each year due to pollution. a study by scientists of u. k. and u. s. universities that uses a high spatial resolution model and an updated concentration response function concluded in that. million global excess deaths in and. million in or a fifth were due to air pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion significantly higher than earlier estimates and with spatially subdivided mortality impacts. a review of evidence found that ambient air pollution exposure is a risk factor correlating with increased total mortality from cardiovascular events. air pollution is also emerging as a risk factor for stroke particularly in developing countries where pollutant levels are highest. a study found that in women air pollution is not associated with hemorrhagic but with ischemic stroke. air pollution was also found to be associated with increased incidence and mortality from coronary stroke in a cohort study in. associations are believed to be causal and effects may be mediated by vasoconstriction low grade inflammation and atherosclerosis other mechanisms such as autonomic nervous system imbalance have also been suggested. research has demonstrated increased risk of developing asthma and copd from increased exposure to traffic related air pollution. additionally air pollution has been associated with increased hospitalization and mortality from asthma and copd. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease includes diseases such as chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a study conducted in in the wake of the great smog of compared london residents with residents of gloucester peterborough and norwich three towns with low reported death rates from chronic bronchitis. all subjects were male postal truck drivers aged to. compared to the subjects from the outlying towns the london subjects exhibited more severe respiratory symptoms reduced lung function and increased sputum production and purulence. the differences were more pronounced for subjects aged to. the study controlled for age and smoking habits so concluded that air pollution was the most likely cause of the observed differences. more studies have shown that air pollution exposure from traffic reduces lung function development in children and lung function may be compromised by air pollution even at low concentrations. air pollution exposure also cause lung cancer in non smokers. it is believed that much like cystic fibrosis by living in a more urban environment serious health hazards become more apparent. studies have shown that in urban areas people suffer mucus hypersecretion lower levels of lung function and more self diagnosis of chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a review of evidence regarding whether ambient air pollution exposure is a risk factor for cancer in found solid data to conclude that long term exposure to pm. increases the overall risk of non accidental mortality by per a microg m increase. exposure to pm. was also associated with an increased risk of mortality from lung cancer and total cardiovascular mortality. the review further noted that living close to busy traffic appears to be associated with elevated risks of these three outcomes increase in lung cancer deaths cardiovascular deaths and overall non accidental deaths. the reviewers also found suggestive evidence that exposure to pm. is positively associated with mortality from coronary heart diseases and exposure to so increases mortality from lung cancer but the data was insufficient to provide solid conclusions. another investigation showed that higher activity level increases deposition fraction of aerosol particles in human lung and recommended avoiding heavy activities like running in outdoor space at polluted areas. in a large danish epidemiological study found an increased risk of lung cancer for people who lived in areas with high nitrogen oxide concentrations. in this study the association was higher for non smokers than smokers. an additional danish study also in likewise noted evidence of possible associations between air pollution and other forms of cancer including cervical cancer and brain cancer. in a study of taiwanese residents over a period of estimated that every g m decrease in the ambient concentration of pm. was associated with a reduced risk of chronic kidney disease development. in the united states despite the passage of the clean air act in in at least million americans were living in non attainment areasregions in which the concentration of certain air pollutants exceeded federal standards. these dangerous pollutants are known as the criteria pollutants and include ozone particulate matter sulfur dioxide nitrogen dioxide carbon monoxide and lead. protective measures to ensure childrens health are being taken in cities such as new delhi india where buses now use compressed natural gas to help eliminate the pea soup smog. a recent study in europe has found that exposure to ultrafine particles can increase blood pressure in children. according to a who report in polluted air leads to the poisoning of millions of children under the age of resulting in the death of some six hundred thousand children annually. prenatal exposure to polluted air has been linked to a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders in children. for example exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons was associated with reduced iq scores and symptoms of anxiety and depression. they can also lead to detrimental perinatal health outcomes that are often fatal in developing countries. a study found that pahs might play a role in the development of childhood attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. researchers have also begun to find evidence for air pollution as a risk factor for autism spectrum disorder. in los angeles children who were living in areas with high levels of traffic related air pollution were more likely to be diagnosed with autism between years of age. the connection between air pollution and neurodevelopmental disorders in children is thought to be related to epigenetic dysregulation of the primordial germ cells embryo and fetus during a critical period. some pahs are considered endocrine disruptors and are lipid soluble. when they build up in adipose tissue they can be transferred across the placenta. ambient levels of air pollution have been associated with preterm birth and low birth weight. a who worldwide survey on maternal and perinatal health found a statistically significant association between low birth weights and increased levels of exposure to pm.. women in regions with greater than average pm. levels had statistically significant higher odds of pregnancy resulting in a low birth weight infant even when adjusted for country related variables. the effect is thought to be from stimulating inflammation and increasing oxidative stress. a study by the university of york found that in exposure to pm. was strongly associated with of preterm births globally which was approximately. million premature births. the countries with the highest air pollution associated preterm births were in south and east asia the middle east north africa and west sub saharan africa. the source of pm. differs greatly by region. in south and east asia pregnant women are frequently exposed to indoor air pollution because of wood and other biomass fuels being used for cooking which are responsible for more than of regional pollution. in the middle east north africa and west sub saharan africa fine pm comes from natural sources such as dust storms. the united states had an estimated preterm births associated with exposure to pm. in. a study performed by wang et al. between the years of and has found a correlation between sulfur dioxide and total suspended particulates and preterm births and low birth weights in beijing. a group of pregnant women in four separate regions of beijing were monitored from early pregnancy to delivery along with daily air pollution levels of sulfur dioxide and tsp. the estimated reduction in birth weight was. g for every g m increase in so and. g for each g m increase in tsp. these associations were statistically significant in both summer and winter although summer was greater. the proportion of low birth weight attributable to air pollution was. this is the largest attributable risk ever reported for the known risk factors of low birth weight. coal stoves which are in of homes are a major source of air pollution in this area. brauer et al. studied the relationship between air pollution and proximity to a highway with pregnancy outcomes in a vancouver cohort of pregnant woman using addresses to estimate exposure during pregnancy. exposure to no no co pm and pm. were associated with infants born small for gestational age. women living less than meters away from an expressway or highway were more likely to give birth to a sga infant. even in areas with relatively low levels of air pollution public health effects can be significant and costly since a large number of people breathe in such pollutants. a study published in found that even in areas of the u. s. where ozone and pm. meet federal standards medicare recipients who are exposed to more air pollution have higher mortality rates. a scientific study for the british columbia lung association showed that a small improvement in air quality would produce million in annual savings in the metro vancouver region in. this finding is based on health valuation of lethal and sub lethal affects. in scientists found that the boundary layer air over the southern ocean around antarctica is unpolluted by humans. data is accumulating that air pollution exposure also affects the central nervous system. in a june study conducted by researchers at the university of rochester medical center published in the journal environmental health perspectives it was discovered that early exposure to air pollution causes the same damaging changes in the brain as autism and schizophrenia. the study also shows that air pollution also affected short term memory learning ability and impulsivity. lead researcher professor deborah cory slechta said that when we looked closely at the ventricles we could see that the white matter that normally surrounds them hadnt fully developed. it appears that inflammation had damaged those brain cells and prevented that region of the brain from developing and the ventricles simply expanded to fill the space. our findings add to the growing body of evidence that air pollution may play a role in autism as well as in other neurodevelopmental disorders. in a study of mice air pollution also has a more significant negative effect on males than on females. in experimental studies reported the detection of significant episodic cognitive impairment from impurities in indoor air breathed by test subjects who were not informed about changes in the air quality. researchers at the harvard university and suny upstate medical university and syracuse university measured the cognitive performance of participants in three different controlled laboratory atmospheres that simulated those found in conventional and green buildings as well as green buildings with enhanced ventilation. performance was evaluated objectively using the widely used strategic management simulation software simulation tool which is a well validated assessment test for executive decision making in an unconstrained situation allowing initiative and improvisation. significant deficits were observed in the performance scores achieved in increasing concentrations of either volatile organic compounds or carbon dioxide while keeping other factors constant. the highest impurity levels reached are not uncommon in some classroom or office environments. air pollution increases the risk of dementia in people over years old. in india in it was reported that air pollution by black carbon and ground level ozone had reduced crop yields in the most affected areas by almost half in when compared to levels. air pollution costs the world economy trillion per year as a result of productivity losses and degraded quality of life according to a joint study by the world bank and the institute for health metrics and evaluation at the university of washington. these productivity losses are caused by deaths due to diseases caused by air pollution. one out of ten deaths in was caused by diseases associated with air pollution and the problem is getting worse. the problem is even more acute in the developing world. children under age in lower income countries are more than times as likely to die from exposure to air pollution as children in high income countries. the report states that additional economic losses caused by air pollution including health costs and the adverse effect on agricultural and other productivity were not calculated in the report and thus the actual costs to the world economy are far higher than trillion. artificial air pollution may be detectable on earth from distant vantage points such as other planetary systems via atmospheric seti including no pollution levels and with telescopic technology close to today. it may also be possible to detect extraterrestrial civilizations this way. the worlds worst short term civilian pollution crisis was the bhopal disaster in india. leaked industrial vapours from the union carbide factory belonging to union carbide inc. u. s. a. killed at least people and injured from to. the united kingdom suffered its worst air pollution event when the december great smog of formed over london. in six days more than died and more recent estimates put the figure at nearer. an accidental leak of anthrax spores from a biological warfare laboratory in the former ussr in near sverdlovsk is believed to have caused at least deaths. the worst single incident of air pollution to occur in the us occurred in donora pennsylvania in late october when people died and over were injured. there are now practical alternatives to the principal causes of air pollution various pollution control technologies and strategies are available to reduce air pollution. at its most basic level land use planning is likely to involve zoning and transport infrastructure planning. in most developed countries land use planning is an important part of social policy ensuring that land is used efficiently for the benefit of the wider economy and population as well as to protect the environment. because a large share of air pollution is caused by combustion of fossil fuels such as coal and oil the reduction of these fuels can reduce air pollution drastically. most effective is the switch to clean power sources such as wind power solar power hydro power which dont cause air pollution. efforts to reduce pollution from mobile sources includes expanding regulation to new sources increased fuel efficiency conversion to cleaner fuels and conversion to electric vehicles. titanium dioxide has been researched for its ability to reduce air pollution. ultraviolet light will release free electrons from material thereby creating free radicals which break up vocs and nox gases. one form is superhydrophilic. in prof. tony ryan and prof. simon armitage of university of sheffield prepared a meter by meter sized poster coated with microscopic pollution eating nanoparticles of titanium dioxide. placed on a building this giant poster can absorb the toxic emission from around cars each day. a very effective means to reduce air pollution is the transition to renewable energy. according to a study published in energy and environmental science in the switch to renewable energy in the united states would eliminate about premature mortalities per year and about in if no biomass were used. this would save about billion in health costs a year due to reduced air pollution in or about. of the u. s. gross domestic product. air quality improvement is a near term benefit among the many societal benefits from climate change mitigation. there is limited evidence that efforts to reduce particulate matter in the air can result in better health in africa the middle east eastern europe central asia and southeast asia. the following items are commonly used as pollution control devices in industry and transportation. they can either destroy contaminants or remove them from an exhaust stream before it is emitted into the atmosphere. spatiotemporal monitoring of air quality may be necessary for improving air quality and thereby the health and safety of the public and assessing impacts of interventions. such monitoring is done to different extents with different regulatory requirements with discrepant regional coverage by a variety of organizations and governance entities such as using a variety of technologies for use of the data and sensing such mobile iot sensors satellites and monitoring stations. in general there are two types of air quality standards. the first class of standards set maximum atmospheric concentrations for specific pollutants. environmental agencies enact regulations which are intended to result in attainment of these target levels. the second class take the form of a scale with various thresholds which is used to communicate to the public the relative risk of outdoor activity. the scale may or may not distinguish between different pollutants. in canada air pollution and associated health risks are measured with the air quality health index. it is a health protection tool used to make decisions to reduce short term exposure to air pollution by adjusting activity levels during increased levels of air pollution. the aqhi is a federal program jointly coordinated by health canada and environment canada. however the aqhi program would not be possible without the commitment and support of the provinces municipalities and ngos. from air quality monitoring to health risk communication and community engagement local partners are responsible for the vast majority of work related to aqhi implementation. the aqhi provides a number from to to indicate the level of health risk associated with local air quality. occasionally when the amount of air pollution is abnormally high the number may exceed. the aqhi provides a local air quality current value as well as a local air quality maximums forecast for today tonight and tomorrow and provides associated health advice. as it is now known that even low levels of air pollution can trigger discomfort for the sensitive population the index has been developed as a continuum the higher the number the greater the health risk and need to take precautions. the index describes the level of health risk associated with this number as low moderate high or very high and suggests steps that can be taken to reduce exposure. the measurement is based on the observed relationship of nitrogen dioxide ground level ozone and particulates with mortality from an analysis of several canadian cities. significantly all three of these pollutants can pose health risks even at low levels of exposure especially among those with pre existing health problems. when developing the aqhi health canadas original analysis of health effects included five major air pollutants particulates ozone and nitrogen dioxide as well as sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide. the latter two pollutants provided little information in predicting health effects and were removed from the aqhi formulation. the aqhi does not measure the effects of odour pollen dust heat or humidity. ta luft is the german air quality regulation. air pollution hotspots are areas where air pollution emissions expose individuals to increased negative health effects. they are particularly common in highly populated urban areas where there may be a combination of stationary sources and mobile sources of pollution. emissions from these sources can cause respiratory disease childhood asthma cancer and other health problems. fine particulate matter such as diesel soot which contributes to more than. million premature deaths around the world each year is a significant problem. it is very small and can lodge itself within the lungs and enter the bloodstream. diesel soot is concentrated in densely populated areas and one in six people in the u. s. live near a diesel pollution hot spot. while air pollution hotspots affect a variety of populations some groups are more likely to be located in hotspots. previous studies have shown disparities in exposure to pollution by race and or income. hazardous land uses tend to be located where property values and income levels are low. low socioeconomic status can be a proxy for other kinds of social vulnerability including race a lack of ability to influence regulation and a lack of ability to move to neighborhoods with less environmental pollution. these communities bear a disproportionate burden of environmental pollution and are more likely to face health risks such as cancer or asthma. studies show that patterns in race and income disparities not only indicate a higher exposure to pollution but also higher risk of adverse health outcomes. communities characterized by low socioeconomic status and racial minorities can be more vulnerable to cumulative adverse health impacts resulting from elevated exposure to pollutants than more privileged communities. blacks and latinos generally face more pollution than whites and asians and low income communities bear a higher burden of risk than affluent ones. racial discrepancies are particularly distinct in suburban areas of the southern united states and metropolitan areas of the midwestern and western united states. residents in public housing who are generally low income and can not move to healthier neighborhoods are highly affected by nearby refineries and chemical plants. air pollution is usually concentrated in densely populated metropolitan areas especially in developing countries where environmental regulations are relatively lax or nonexistent. however even populated areas in developed countries attain unhealthy levels of pollution with los angeles and rome being two examples. between and the incidence of lung cancer in beijing near doubled. while smoking remains the leading cause of lung cancer in china the number of smokers is falling while lung cancer rates are rising. in europe council directive ec on ambient air quality assessment and management provides a common strategy against which member states can set objectives for ambient air quality in order to avoid prevent or reduce harmful effects on human health and the environment... and improve air quality where it is unsatisfactory. on july in the case dieter janecek v freistaat bayern the european court of justice ruled that under this directive citizens have the right to require national authorities to implement a short term action plan that aims to maintain or achieve compliance to air quality limit values. this important case law appears to confirm the role of the ec as centralised regulator to european nation states as regards air pollution control. it places a supranational legal obligation on the uk to protect its citizens from dangerous levels of air pollution furthermore superseding national interests with those of the citizen. in the european commission threatened the uk with legal action against the successive breaching of pm limit values. the uk government has identified that if fines are imposed they could cost the nation upwards of million per year. in march the greater london built up area remains the only uk region in breach of the ecs limit values and has been given months to implement an emergency action plan aimed at meeting the eu air quality directive. the city of london has dangerous levels of pm concentrations estimated to cause deaths per year within the city. as well as the threat of eu fines in it was threatened with legal action for scrapping the western congestion charge zone which is claimed to have led to an increase in air pollution levels. in response to these charges boris johnson mayor of london has criticised the current need for european cities to communicate with europe through their nation states central government arguing that in future a great city like london should be permitted to bypass its government and deal directly with the european commission regarding its air quality action plan. this can be interpreted as recognition that cities can transcend the traditional national government organisational hierarchy and develop solutions to air pollution using global governance networks for example through transnational relations. transnational relations include but are not exclusive to national governments and intergovernmental organisations allowing sub national actors including cities and regions to partake in air pollution control as independent actors. particularly promising at present are global city partnerships. these can be built into networks for example the c cities climate leadership group of which london is a member. the c is a public non state network of the worlds leading cities that aims to curb their greenhouse emissions. the c has been identified as governance from the middle and is an alternative to intergovernmental policy. it has the potential to improve urban air quality as participating cities exchange information learn from best practices and consequently mitigate carbon dioxide emissions independently from national government decisions. a criticism of the c network is that its exclusive nature limits influence to participating cities and risks drawing resources away from less powerful city and regional actors. according to a projection by half of the worlds pollution emissions could be generated by africa. potential contributors to such an outcome include increased burning activities traffic agri food and chemical industries sand dust from the sahara and overall population growth. according to oecd by outdoor air pollution is projected to become the top cause of environmentally related deaths worldwide. global warming portal environment portalcategorieswater pollution is the contamination of water bodies usually as a result of human activities in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services that it would otherwise provide. water bodies include for example lakes rivers oceans aquifers reservoirs and groundwater. water pollution results when contaminants are introduced into these water bodies. in addition to damage to many species water pollution can also lead to water borne diseases for people. water pollution traditionally is attributed to four sources which provide the organization of this article water pollution can also be classified as surface water pollution or groundwater pollution. sources of water pollution are either point sources or non point sources. point sources have one identifiable cause such as a storm drain or a wastewater treatment plant. non point sources are more diffuse such as agricultural runoff. pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. supplying clean drinking water is an important ecosystem service provided by some freshwater systems but approximately million people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water because of pollution. a practical definition of water pollution is water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. therefore pollution is associated with concepts attributed to humans namely the negative alterations and the uses of the water body. water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. due to these contaminants it either does not support a human use such as drinking water or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities such as fish. agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution. the use of fertilizers leads to nutrient pollution in which excess nutrients usually caused by nitrogen or phosphorus containing compounds that are the main components. sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farm fields and pastures discharges from septic tanks and feedlots. in addition to plant focused agriculture fish farming is also a source of pollution. additionally ag runoff often contains high levels of pesticides. using the us as an example the main industrial consumers of water are power plants petroleum refineries iron and steel mills pulp and paper mills and food processing industries. some industries discharge nutrients which impose high bod. some wastes are persistent organic pollutants such as per and polyfluoroalkyl substances sewage typically consists of. water and. solids. globally about. billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of according to an estimate by the joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation. lack of access to sanitation often leads to water pollution e. g. via the practice of open defecation. simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events. when sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows. sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to eutrophication. it is a major source of phosphate for example. sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene cosmetics pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites even at very low concentrations hormones and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action can have an adverse impacts. water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide ranging consequences the environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products is being investigated since at least the s. ppcps include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. more than twenty million tons of ppcps are produced every year. the european union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be priority substances. the source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces sewage blackwater manure that has found its way into the water body. the cause for this can be lack of sanitation or poorly functioning on site sanitation systems sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows during storm events and intensive agriculture. pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include burkholderia pseudomallei cryptosporidium parvum giardia lamblia salmonella norovirus and other viruses parasitic worms including the schistosoma type. a study published in stated that polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed. million people. urban runoff is stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops roads and parking lots and reservoirs. often it is captured in large retaining ponds. it is subject to high suspended solids as well and elevated nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. thermal pollution sometimes called thermal enrichment is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature. thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence. thermal pollution unlike chemical pollution results in a change in the physical properties of water. a common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. the introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. it causes biological pollution. sources of surface water pollution can be grouped into two categories based on their origin point sources and nonpoint sources. point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single identifiable source such as a pipe or ditch. examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant a factory or a city storm drain. the u. s. clean water act defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes. the cwa definition of point source was amended in to include municipal storm sewer systems as well as industrial storm water such as from construction sites. groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater. this type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent contaminant or impurity in the groundwater in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution. pollution can occur from on site sanitation systems landfills effluent from wastewater treatment plants leaking sewers petrol filling stations or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture. pollution can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants such as arsenic or fluoride. using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods physical chemical and biological. some methods may be conducted in situ without sampling such as temperature. others involve collection of samples followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. standardized validated analytical test methods for water and wastewater samples have been published. common physical tests of water include temperature specific conductance or electrical conductance or conductivity solids concentrations and turbidity. water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. frequently used parameters that are quantified are ph biochemical oxygen demand chemical oxygen demand dissolved oxygen total hardness nutrients metals oil and grease total petroleum hydrocarbons surfactants and pesticides. the complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on site because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings. measurements commonly made on site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature ph dissolved oxygen conductivity oxygen reduction potential turbidity and secchi disk depth. sampling of water for physical or chemical testing can be done by several methods depending on the accuracy needed and the characteristics of the contaminant. sampling methods include for example simple random sampling stratified sampling systematic and grid sampling adaptive cluster sampling grab samples semi continuous monitoring and continuous passive sampling remote surveillance remote sensing and biomonitoring. the use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. the use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring. this refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment. biological testing involves the use of plant animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem. they are any biological species or group of species whose function population or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present. one example of a group of bio indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. such organisms can be monitored for changes that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries. for example water pollution in india and china is wide spread. about percent of the water in the cities of china is polluted. one aspect of environmental protection are mandatory regulations but they are only part of the solution. other important tools in pollution control include environmental education economic instruments market forces and stricter enforcements. standards can be precise or imprecise which would require the use of best available technology or best practicable environmental option. market based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges subsidies deposit or refund schemes the creation of a market in pollution credits and enforcement incentives. moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches integrated control measures trans boundary considerations complementary and supplementary control measures life cycle considerations the impacts of chemical mixtures. control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. the infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants. agricultural wastewater treatment for farms and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow. water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels. municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants decentralized wastewater systems nature based solutions or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. for example waste stabilization ponds are a low cost treatment option for sewage particularly for regions with warm climates. uv light can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds. the use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation. well designed and operated systems can remove percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage. some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. while such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants they can also result in large financial costs as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system. in the us cities with large combined systems have not pursued system wide separation projects due to the high cost but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches. in some cases municipalities have installed additional cso storage facilities or expanded sewage treatment capacity. agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals in fertilizer pesticides animal slurry crop residues or irrigation water. agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. it may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater. where land is available for ponds settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles. animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland. constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes. nonpoint source pollution includes sediment runoff nutrient runoff and pesticides. point source pollution includes animal wastes silage liquor milking parlour wastes slaughtering waste vegetable washing water and firewater. many farms generate nonpoint source pollution from surface runoff which is not controlled through a treatment plant. sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls such as mulching and hydroseeding and sediment controls such as sediment basins and silt fences. discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans and specially designed containers and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms. erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology also results in loss of sediment and potentially water pollution. effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of storm water as well as reducing pollutant discharges. local governments use a variety of storm water management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. these techniques called best management practices for water pollution in some countries may focus on water quantity control while others focus on improving water quality and some perform both functions. some examples for legislation to control water pollution are listed below categorieswater pollution is the contamination of water bodies usually as a result of human activities in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services that it would otherwise provide. water bodies include for example lakes rivers oceans aquifers reservoirs and groundwater. water pollution results when contaminants are introduced into these water bodies. in addition to damage to many species water pollution can also lead to water borne diseases for people. water pollution traditionally is attributed to four sources which provide the organization of this article water pollution can also be classified as surface water pollution or groundwater pollution. sources of water pollution are either point sources or non point sources. point sources have one identifiable cause such as a storm drain or a wastewater treatment plant. non point sources are more diffuse such as agricultural runoff. pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. supplying clean drinking water is an important ecosystem service provided by some freshwater systems but approximately million people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water because of pollution. a practical definition of water pollution is water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. therefore pollution is associated with concepts attributed to humans namely the negative alterations and the uses of the water body. water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. due to these contaminants it either does not support a human use such as drinking water or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities such as fish. agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution. the use of fertilizers leads to nutrient pollution in which excess nutrients usually caused by nitrogen or phosphorus containing compounds that are the main components. sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farm fields and pastures discharges from septic tanks and feedlots. in addition to plant focused agriculture fish farming is also a source of pollution. additionally ag runoff often contains high levels of pesticides. using the us as an example the main industrial consumers of water are power plants petroleum refineries iron and steel mills pulp and paper mills and food processing industries. some industries discharge nutrients which impose high bod. some wastes are persistent organic pollutants such as per and polyfluoroalkyl substances sewage typically consists of. water and. solids. globally about. billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of according to an estimate by the joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation. lack of access to sanitation often leads to water pollution e. g. via the practice of open defecation. simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events. when sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows. sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to eutrophication. it is a major source of phosphate for example. sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene cosmetics pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites even at very low concentrations hormones and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action can have an adverse impacts. water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide ranging consequences the environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products is being investigated since at least the s. ppcps include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. more than twenty million tons of ppcps are produced every year. the european union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be priority substances. the source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces sewage blackwater manure that has found its way into the water body. the cause for this can be lack of sanitation or poorly functioning on site sanitation systems sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows during storm events and intensive agriculture. pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include burkholderia pseudomallei cryptosporidium parvum giardia lamblia salmonella norovirus and other viruses parasitic worms including the schistosoma type. a study published in stated that polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed. million people. urban runoff is stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops roads and parking lots and reservoirs. often it is captured in large retaining ponds. it is subject to high suspended solids as well and elevated nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. thermal pollution sometimes called thermal enrichment is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature. thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence. thermal pollution unlike chemical pollution results in a change in the physical properties of water. a common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. the introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. it causes biological pollution. sources of surface water pollution can be grouped into two categories based on their origin point sources and nonpoint sources. point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single identifiable source such as a pipe or ditch. examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant a factory or a city storm drain. the u. s. clean water act defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes. the cwa definition of point source was amended in to include municipal storm sewer systems as well as industrial storm water such as from construction sites. groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater. this type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent contaminant or impurity in the groundwater in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution. pollution can occur from on site sanitation systems landfills effluent from wastewater treatment plants leaking sewers petrol filling stations or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture. pollution can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants such as arsenic or fluoride. using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods physical chemical and biological. some methods may be conducted in situ without sampling such as temperature. others involve collection of samples followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. standardized validated analytical test methods for water and wastewater samples have been published. common physical tests of water include temperature specific conductance or electrical conductance or conductivity solids concentrations and turbidity. water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. frequently used parameters that are quantified are ph biochemical oxygen demand chemical oxygen demand dissolved oxygen total hardness nutrients metals oil and grease total petroleum hydrocarbons surfactants and pesticides. the complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on site because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings. measurements commonly made on site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature ph dissolved oxygen conductivity oxygen reduction potential turbidity and secchi disk depth. sampling of water for physical or chemical testing can be done by several methods depending on the accuracy needed and the characteristics of the contaminant. sampling methods include for example simple random sampling stratified sampling systematic and grid sampling adaptive cluster sampling grab samples semi continuous monitoring and continuous passive sampling remote surveillance remote sensing and biomonitoring. the use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. the use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring. this refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment. biological testing involves the use of plant animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem. they are any biological species or group of species whose function population or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present. one example of a group of bio indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. such organisms can be monitored for changes that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries. for example water pollution in india and china is wide spread. about percent of the water in the cities of china is polluted. one aspect of environmental protection are mandatory regulations but they are only part of the solution. other important tools in pollution control include environmental education economic instruments market forces and stricter enforcements. standards can be precise or imprecise which would require the use of best available technology or best practicable environmental option. market based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges subsidies deposit or refund schemes the creation of a market in pollution credits and enforcement incentives. moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches integrated control measures trans boundary considerations complementary and supplementary control measures life cycle considerations the impacts of chemical mixtures. control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. the infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants. agricultural wastewater treatment for farms and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow. water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels. municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants decentralized wastewater systems nature based solutions or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. for example waste stabilization ponds are a low cost treatment option for sewage particularly for regions with warm climates. uv light can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds. the use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation. well designed and operated systems can remove percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage. some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. while such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants they can also result in large financial costs as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system. in the us cities with large combined systems have not pursued system wide separation projects due to the high cost but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches. in some cases municipalities have installed additional cso storage facilities or expanded sewage treatment capacity. agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals in fertilizer pesticides animal slurry crop residues or irrigation water. agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. it may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater. where land is available for ponds settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles. animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland. constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes. nonpoint source pollution includes sediment runoff nutrient runoff and pesticides. point source pollution includes animal wastes silage liquor milking parlour wastes slaughtering waste vegetable washing water and firewater. many farms generate nonpoint source pollution from surface runoff which is not controlled through a treatment plant. sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls such as mulching and hydroseeding and sediment controls such as sediment basins and silt fences. discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans and specially designed containers and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms. erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology also results in loss of sediment and potentially water pollution. effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of storm water as well as reducing pollutant discharges. local governments use a variety of storm water management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. these techniques called best management practices for water pollution in some countries may focus on water quantity control while others focus on improving water quality and some perform both functions. some examples for legislation to control water pollution are listed below water pollution is a major environmental issue in india. the largest source of water pollution in india is untreatedsewage. other sources of pollution include agricultural runoff and unregulated small scale industry. most rivers lakes and surface water in india are polluted due to industries untreated sewage and solid wastes. a study found that discharge of untreated sewage is the single most important source of pollution of surface and ground water in india. there is a large gap between generation and treatment of domestic waste water in india. the problem is not only that india lacks sufficient treatment capacity but also that the sewage treatment plants that exist do not operate and are not maintained. the majority of the government owned sewage treatment plants remain closed most of the time due to improper design or poor maintenance or lack of reliable electricity supply to operate the plants together with absentee employees and poor management. the waste water generated in these areas normally percolates into the soil or evaporates. the uncollected waste accumulates in the urban areas causing unhygienic conditions and releasing pollutants that leach into surface and groundwater. sewage discharged from cities towns and some villages is the predominant cause of water pollution in india. investment is needed to bridge the gap between the sewage india generates and its treatment capacity of sewage per day. major cities of india produce million litres per day of sewage but the urban sewage treatment capacity is only mld. a large number of indian rivers are severely polluted as a result of discharge of domestic sewage. the central pollution control board a ministry of environment forests government of india entity has established a national water quality monitoring network comprising monitoring stations in states and in union territories on various rivers and water bodies across the country. this effort monitors water quality year round. the monitoring network covers rivers lakes tanks ponds creeks canals drains and wells distributed across india. water samples are routinely analysed for parameters including dissolved oxygen bacteriological and other internationally established parameters for water quality. additionally trace metals parameters and pesticide residues are analysed. biomonitoring is also carried out on specific locations. the scientific analysis of water samples from to indicates that the organic and bacterial contamination is severe in water bodies of india. this is mainly due to discharge of domestic waste water in untreated form mostly from the urban centres of india. in the water quality monitoring found almost all rivers with high levels of bod. the worst pollution in decreasing order were found in river markanda followed by river kali river amlakhadi yamuna canal river yamuna at delhi and river betwa. for context a water sample with a day bod between and mg o l indicates a very clean water to mg o l indicates a moderately clean water to indicates borderline water and greater than mg o l indicates ecologically unsafe polluted water. the levels of bod are severe near the cities and major towns. in rural parts of india the river bod levels were sufficient to support aquatic life. rivers yamuna ganga gomti ghaghara chambal mahi vardha and godavari are amongst the other most coliform polluted water bodies in india. for context coliform must be below mpn ml preferably absent from water for it to be considered safe for general human use and for irrigation where coliform may cause disease outbreak from contaminated water in agriculture. in percent of water quality monitoring reported coliform concentrations above mpn ml. during percent of all water quality monitoring stations reported a total coliform levels exceeding those levels suggesting recent effort to add pollution control infrastructure and upgrade treatment plants in india may be reversing the water pollution trend. treatment of domestic sewage and subsequent utilization of treated sewage for irrigation can prevent pollution of water bodies reduce the demand for fresh water in the irrigation sector and become a resource for irrigation. since indian wastewater treatment plant market has been growing annually at the rate of to percent. the united states is the largest supplier of treatment equipment and supplies to india with percent market share of new installation. at that rate of expansion and assuming the government of india continues on its path of reform major investments in sewage treatment plants and electricity infrastructure development it was estimated india will nearly triple its water treatment capacity by and treatment capacity supply will match indias daily sewage water treatment requirements by about. water conservation in india is gaining pace. the ganga rejuvenation efforts by the union government the yamuna clean up are some of the government initiated efforts. the chennai river restoration trusts efforts to clean the cooum adyar rivers in chennai and civil society efforts spearheaded by organizations like environmentalist foundation of india to clean lakes and ponds in the country are seen as significant development towards water conservation. a joint study by pgimer and the punjab pollution control board in revealed that in villages along the nullah fluoride mercury beta endosulphan and heptachlor pesticide were more than permissible limit in ground and tap water. plus the water had high concentration of cod and bod ammonia phosphate chloride chromium arsenic and chlorpyrifos pesticide. the ground water also contains nickel and selenium while the tap water has high concentration of lead nickel and cadmium. flooding during monsoons worsens indias water pollution problem as it washes and moves solid waste and contaminated soils into its rivers and wetlands. the annual average precipitation in india is about billion cubic metres. from this with the state of indian infrastructure in the available water resource through the rivers is about billion cubic meters. accounting to uneven distribution of rain over the country each year water resources available for utilization including ground water is claimed to be about billion cubic meters. much of this water is unsafe because pollution degrades water quality. water pollution severely limits the amount of water available to indian consumers its industry and its agriculture. more than million people live along the river. an estimated persons ritually bath daily in the river which is considered holy by hindus. ganges river pollution is a major health risk. nrgba was established by the central government of india on february under section of the environment protection act. it also declared ganges as the national river of india. the chair includes the prime minister of india and chief ministers of states through which the ganges flows. by an estimate by delhis sacred yamuna river contained coliform bacteria per cc of water. a number of ngos pressure groups eco clubs as well as citizens movements have been active in their task to clean the river. even though india revised its national water policy in to encourage community participation and decentralize water management the countrys complex bureaucracy ensures that it remains a mere statement of intent. responsibility for managing water issues is fragmented among a dozen different ministries and departments without any coordination. the government bureaucracy and state run project department has failed to solve the problem despite having spent many years and million on this project. water pollution in the united states is a growing problem that became critical in the century with the development of mechanized agriculture mining and industry although laws and regulations introduced in the late century have improved water quality in many water bodies. extensive industrialization and rapid urban growth exacerbated water pollution as a lack of regulation allowed for discharges of sewage toxic chemicals nutrients and other pollutants into surface water. in the early century communities began to install drinking water treatment systems but control of the principal pollution sourcesdomestic sewage industry and agriculturewas not effectively addressed in the us until the later century. these pollution sources can affect both groundwater and surface water. multiple pollution incidents such as the kingston fossil plant coal fly ash slurry spill and the deepwater horizon oil spill have left lasting impacts on water quality ecosystems and public health in the united states. many solutions to water pollution in the united states can be implemented to curtail water pollution. this includes municipal wastewater treatment agricultural and industrial wastewater treatment erosion and sediment control and the control of urban runoff. the continued implementation of pollution prevention control and treatment measures are used to pursue the goal of maintaining water quality within levels specified in federal and state regulations. however many water bodies across the country continue to violate water quality standards in the century. water pollution was identified as a growing problem in the us by scientists government officials and the public in the century. many cities and towns piped their untreated domestic sewage into nearby waterways. wastewater discharged by factories mines and other businesses increased as the economy expanded. large cities and later smaller communities began to install drinking water treatment systems in the early century but sewage treatment plants were limited at that time and not very effective. effective control of sewage and industrial pollution was not comprehensively addressed until later in the century. agricultural pollution emerged as a growing problem in the century with the increased mechanization of agriculture and increasing use of chemicals. following the passage of thelean water act the levels of water pollution in us waterways generally have experienced a dramatic decrease with respect to sewage treatment and many types of industrial wastewater. however more than half of u. s. stream and river miles continue to violate federal water quality standards in the century. surveys of lakes ponds and reservoirs indicated that about percent were impaired and a little more than percent of the nation s coastlines and percent of the surveyed ocean and near coastal areas were also impaired. in a report on water quality in the united states in percent of assessed stream miles percent of assessed lake acres and percent of assessed bays and estuarine square miles were classified as polluted. agriculture industry urban runoff and other sources continue to discharge waste into surface waters nationwide. this poses huge environmental and health risks given that these water sources are used as drinking water and for agricultural use. while the cwa has made positive contributions to the state of surface water in the united states the law does not fully address all aspects of pollution. many think that congress should revise or expand the law to address these problems and gaps in regulation. although the cwa has been effective in controlling point source pollution it has not been as effective with nonpoint sources. despite the negative health and ecosystem impacts of water pollution solutions exist that are able to treat and decrease pollution levels in water bodies. surface water consists of all forms of visible water sources such as oceans lakes and rivers. currently a significant percentage of surface freshwater sources are polluted in the united states. this poses a huge threat to american water sources because over of water used in the united states is from these freshwater sources. a majority of freshwater contamination cases are a result of nutrient pollution which is the result of farm waste and fertilizer entering the water source and resulting in toxic zones with depleted oxygen levels. groundwater is rainfall that collects in porous spaces deep underground which are called aquifers. humans can access the water that collects in an aquifer by building wells to pump the water to the surface for use. about of drinking water in america comes from groundwater sources. when contaminants enter aquifers the pollution spreads eliminating the potential to use the aquifer for drinking water. groundwater contamination is often the result of chemicals that seep through the soil and into the water supply such as pesticides and fertilizers. other causes of contamination in groundwater includes gasoline oil road salts septic tank waste or leakage from landfills. point source pollution occurs when water pollution contamination comes from a single source. point sources could include leaking septic tanks oil spills dumping of waste or wastewater treatment facilities. in order to prevent point source pollution from occurring the clean water act regulates what can be discharged into a water body by requiring each facility to obtain a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit. nonpoint source pollution occurs when the contamination derives from multiple different sources. this type of pollution is very challenging to manage given that the original source may be difficult to identify. nonpoint source pollution is the most common type of pollution because as rainfall runs off of land on its path to different water sources it becomes contaminated by pollutants from the surrounding area. these sources include agriculture related pollutants urban runoff or drainage. the cwa does not authorize the issuance of npdes permits for nonpoint sources trans boundary water pollution occurs when pollution in one country s waters spreads and damages another country s environment or water supply. trans boundary pollution can travel through rivers or ocean currents. historically municipal sewage was a major contributor of water pollution across the united states. the lack of proper treatment of sewage resulted in many contaminated water bodies across the county. domestic sewage became a widespread problem with the onset of the industrial revolution in the century population growth and increasing urbanization. through the early century most communities had no sewage treatment plants or waste disposal sites. some cities built sewer pipes which carried their sewage to a nearby river or coastal area but lacked any treatment of the wastes instead depositing the sewage directly into the water. the first wastewater treatment plants were built in the late and early centuries in the united states and typically did not fully treat the wastes. the extensive construction of new and upgraded sewage treatment systems following the passage of thelean water act has greatly reduced municipal discharges. since the s secondary treatment has been the national standard for municipalities. some individual systems continue to cause localized water quality problems due to outdated or leaking piping and collection systems leading to combined sewer overflows and sanitary sewer overflows. poor upkeep of sewer infrastructure results in contamination from leaks and contributed to a rating from the american society of civil engineers of a d grade for americas wastewater infrastructure. while all domestic wastewater is now treated nationwide leaks and spills of municipal sewage pose a significant problem because wastewater carries diseases like salmonella hepatitis and many other infectious diseases that roughly sickens about. million americans every year. water research during the late s and s indicated that stormwater runoff was a significant cause of water quality impairment in many parts of the us. increased land development throughout the countryin both cities and suburbshas led to an increase in impervious surfaces which generates increased surface runoff during wet weather. the development of new roads and smooth surfaces have contributed to polluted waters easily flowing into nearby rivers lakes and the oceans across the usa. these paved surfaces and roads restrict water from soaking into the ground and instead allows water to freely flow across pavements while picking up chemicals fertilizers pesticides and many other pollutants that causes water pollution in the bodies of water in the usa. early indications of pollution from industrial waste in the united states existed since the s increasing as the industrial revolution expanded throughout the united states and its environmental impacts were observed more frequently. industrial wastes contribute toxic pollutants and chemicals and can have detrimental ecosystem and public health impacts if discharged directly into surface water. historical accounts of early industrial activity in the us provide a general description of the kinds of waste generated. mining operations iron forges and blast furnaces were some of the early industries in the u. s. that generated waste. in the late and early centuries wastes from mining operations entered rivers and streams and iron bloomeries and furnaces used water for cooling. these industries were relatively small businesses generating small amounts of product and the wastes they discharged to rivers and streams were proportionately dilute. however as factories grew in the century so did the quantity of pollution produced. in the early century the introduction of steam engines in both the mining and manufacturing sectors greatly expanded productivity and increased use of the engines generated larger volumes of heated water. the productivity gains along with the introduction of railroads in the s and swhich increased the overall demand for coal and mineralsled to additional generation of wastes. the volumes and concentrations of industrial wastes increased significantly in the mid century in multiple business sectors including mining. mining wastes were increasing not only from coal and mineral mines in the east and south but from mining of gold silver and other metals in the newly developing west. the onset of the second industrial revolution in the mid to late century introduced new heavy industries in the us generating larger volumes and new kinds of wastes. these industries included industrial expansion continued into the century including large scale expansion of paper products manufacturing which produced additional types and quantities of wastes. today industrial pollution is caused by discharges and emissions from manufacturing plants in certain industries which continues to pollute surface waters nationwide. many manufacturing processes generate wastewater contributing to the water pollution found in rivers lakes and oceans. in the u. s. environmental protection agency found that fossil fuel power stations particularly coal fired plants were the largest contributors of industrial water pollution. epa found instances where power plants discharged toxic pollutants such as mercury arsenic and lead into surface waters. although many industrial facilities have added or expanded their wastewater treatment systems to comply with the cwa certain industrial sectors and facilities have not addressed all components in their discharges and continue to contribute significant quantities of pollutants to surface waters in the us. based on a report of industrial and commercial facilities subject to the epa toxics release inventory system discharges of toxic pollutants in totaled about million pounds a decrease of million pounds from mostly due to reduced nitrate discharges. discharges and chemicals from agriculture greatly contributes to water pollution in the us as rainwater flows through fields and into bodies of water. the application of chemical fertilizers collection of animal manure and use of chemicals used by farmers results in nitrogen and phosphorus. when washed away from farming fields nitrogen and phosphorus found in fertilizers can cause eutrophication of water bodies. eutrophication results in algal blooms which deplete oxygen in bodies of water resulting in dead zones where life can no longer be sustained. excessive use or improper use of fertilizers pesticides and various types of chemicals during farming contribute to water pollution and are currently the third largest source for water pollution in lakes second largest source of water pollution in wetlands and a major contributor to pollution in estuaries and ground water. other activities that contribute to water pollution include municipal wastewater is composed of human waste and other residential waste streams. in the united states approximately billion gallons of wastewater are collected every day and sent to sewage treatment plants. wastewater is collected through combined sewers which are used for sanitary waste and stormwater runoff or in separate sanitary sewers. sewage treatment plants include physical removal processes such as screens and settling tanks and biological processes to remove organic matter and pathogens from water. treatment plants have strict permit requirements to ensure that their discharges will not cause harm to the environment or public health. some plants have enhanced treatment processes to control nutrient pollution before discharge. agricultural run off is one of the leading causes of water pollution in the united states. funding from clean water grants are available to farmers to install projects to help control agricultural pollution before it enters water sources. methods to minimize and contain water pollution from agriculture in the united states include watershed efforts nutrient management cover crops buffers management of livestock waste and drainage management. buffers are small strips of land covered in plants that are able to remove pollutants such as nitrogen phosphorus and sediment prior to discharge in a water body. both buffers and crop covers are used to remove these pollutants from agricultural runoff. erosion and sediment controls are techniques used to mitigate sediment pollution in waterways. the most common and efficient control method on agricultural land is crop management which increases soil cover and stabilizes slopes. without proper soil stabilization techniques rainfall can cause large quantities of sediment to be washed away into waterways creating issues with sunlight penetration and visibility. typical preventive measures for construction sites include erosion control matting and mulching and installation of silt fences to trap sediment not captured by the erosion controls. urban areas affect water quality by increasing the volume of run off and pollutant loads. one solution to decrease run off is constructing new surfaces with pervious pavers that allow rainwater to pass through the surface to groundwater aquifers and decrease the quantity of urban run off. additionally proper use and storage of household chemicals are critical to decrease incidences of spills that pollute local waterways. the deepwater horizon oil spill is considered to be the largest marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry. the incident began on april when a semi submersible bp oil rig exploded in the gulf of mexico about miles off of the coast of louisiana. the explosion led to discharges between to barrels of oil per day. it took responders days to stop the spill at which point the rig had leaked an estimated. million barrels of oil into the gulf. over miles of shoreline on the gulf of mexico from texas to florida were impacted by the deepwater horizon spill. of the crew members present during the deepwater horizon oil spill died and were seriously injured. in addition the frequency of hurricanes in the gulf makes the effects of long term exposure on humans more applicable as these storms are capable of carrying crude oil over miles of ocean towards the shore. according to a research article from lsu damages to those living in the presence of crude oil the past years are likely permanent as chronic exposure leads to increased cancer risks cardiovascular issues and respiratory problems. oil exposure and its respiratory effects were also analyzed in a study on the coast guard personnel deployed to help clean up the spill. the article has. of responders stating they were exposed to crude oil and. stating they were exposed to oil dispersants. of the nearly personnel who completed the survey. experienced coughing. experienced shortness of breath and. experienced wheezing. the study also found that exposure to both oil and oil dispersants presented associations that were much stronger than oil alone for the different respiratory symptoms. the northeast gulf of mexico shoreline contains about percent of the coastal and freshwater marshes in the united states. a marsh environment tends to have standing water making it among the most sensitive habitats to oil spills. without the natural cleaning mechanism that flowing water provides oil is able to coat marsh vegetation for longer periods of time ruining nurseries that then impact a host of interconnected species. the gulf of mexico is also home to species of marine mammals. of these up to percent of all kemp s ridley sea turtles present during the spill ended up dying and the louisiana bottlenose dolphin ended up facing a percent decline in population. however because the bp oil spill occurred miles from any land it wasn t as damaging to ecosystems along the shore as other oil spills. however habitats along the shore were still exposed through balls of tar that would clump together and wash up on beaches impacting local wildlife. also the consequences that drifting plumes of oil had on the deep sea ecosystem is relatively unknown. in december the u. s. filed a complaint in district court against bp and several other defendants associated with the spill. the complaint resulted in a record setting settlement enforcing a. billion clean water act penalty on bp exploration production and up to. billion in natural resource damages. however by bp had successfully recuperated most of the billion lost in market value after the spill. this recovery was attributed to the company s inclination to continue exploring new oil resources despite the accident. between and bp s gulf of mexico oil rigs doubled and they began investing billion towards opportunities in alaska in. on the other hand a article from npr exhibited how fishing cities along the gulf coast are still feeling harmful effects of the oil spill. in an interview with an oysterman from alabama he states business is still struggling... because of the lack of oyster production... i place the blame for that on the oil spill. the fisherman goes on to describe how the oyster reefs off of louisiana have not been producing like they should since the spill. water pollution in the city of woburn massachusetts gained public recognition in the lawsuit filed by the families of children in woburn who had died from leukemia in unusually high numbers. the families attributed the leukemia to the town s polluted drinking water which had been contaminated over years of industry most notably the toxic compounds used by leather factories in the area. the martin county coal slurry spill occurred on october when a coal slurry broke into an abandoned mine and sent an estimated million gallons of slurry into the tug fork river. the spill polluted miles of the big sandy river and a water supply for over residents. on december a dike ruptured on the kingston fossil plant in roane county tennessee and released. billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry into the emory river. it was the largest fly ash release and worst coal ash related disaster in u. s. history. on august workers on the gold king mine in silverton colorado released million gallons of toxic wastewater when attempting to add a tap to the tailing pond for the mine. the wastewater carried unsafe levels of heavy metals with some parts of the river testing for hundreds of times over their limits. during the late century there was little federal government attention paid to what were considered to be local environmental and health problems. the only federal legislation to address water pollution during this era was the rivers and harbors act of. in the law congress prohibited the dumping of refuse debris that interfered with navigationbut other forms of pollution were not addressed. in to address oil spills in harbors congress passed the oil pollution act. the law provided for penalties in the event of oil spills but they were applicable only to vessels in coastal waters. in the s and s state water boards were created to monitor some aspects of water quality. even prior to the clean water act the united states public health service investigated reports of water borne disease. in the s the public health service tested drinking water quality at at public establishments in door county wisconsin having their own wells. the clean water act of was the first act of its kind to establish a broad regulatory framework for improving water quality in the united states. the cwa defines procedures for pollution control and developing criteria and standards for pollutants in surface water. the law authorizes the environmental protection agency to regulate surface water pollution in the united states in partnership with state agencies. prior to it was legal to discharge wastewater to surface waters without testing for or removing water pollutants. the cwa was amended in and to adjust the federal proportion of construction grant funding for local governments regulate municipal storm sewer discharges and to later establish the clean water state revolving fund. the fund provides low interest loans to improve municipal sewage treatment systems and finance other water quality improvements. under the cwa the national pollution discharge elimination system regulates permits for discharges into water bodies. the epa regulations require each facility to apply for a specific permit for its wastewater discharges and consequently require that each facility treat its wastewater. in addition to effluent limitations the permits include monitoring and reporting requirements which are used by epa and states to enforce the limitations. however over fifty percent of the rivers in the united states still violate pollution standards published by the states. cwa and npdes form the backbone of regulation for controlling surface water pollution in the united states. additional regulation exists on a state by state basis allowing for more stringent regulation for protected bodies of water. additional regulation may be enacted to limit pollution that comes from non point sources such as agriculture. in many watersheds non point sources are the principal cause of noncompliance with water quality standards. some economists questioned whether the law was delivering the promised results of cleaner rivers and lakes and whether benefits exceeded the costs to society. the united states government has spent over one trillion dollars trying to combat water pollution. in the cwa congress had declared that the nations waters were to be free of pollutants by only eleven years after enactment. in general water quality has improved nationwide since but not all pollution has been eliminated. between and there was a percent increase in the number of waterways that are safe for fishing. data supporting this finding is limited only percent of the united states waterways had been tested for contamination. categoriespollution is the introduction of contaminants into the natural environment that cause adverse change. pollution can take the form of chemical substances or energy such as noise heat or light. pollutants the components of pollution can be either foreign substances energies or naturally occurring contaminants. pollution is often classed as point source or nonpoint source pollution. in pollution killed million people worldwide. major forms of pollution include air pollution light pollution litter noise pollution plastic pollution soil contamination radioactive contamination thermal pollution visual pollution and water pollution. the major forms of pollution are listed below along with the particular contaminant relevant to each of them the major forms of pollution are also listed below in the pollution navigation box a pollutant is a waste material that pollutes air water or soil. three factors determine the severity of a pollutant its chemical nature the concentration the area affected and the persistence. air pollution comes from both natural and human made sources. however globally human made pollutants from combustion construction mining agriculture and warfare are increasingly significant in the air pollution equation. motor vehicle emissions are one of the leading causes of air pollution. china united states russia india mexico and japan are the world leaders in air pollution emissions. principal stationary pollution sources include chemical plants coal fired power plants oil refineries petrochemical plants nuclear waste disposal activity incinerators large livestock farms pvc factories metals production factories plastics factories and other heavy industry. agricultural air pollution comes from contemporary practices which include clear felling and burning of natural vegetation as well as spraying of pesticides and herbicidesabout million metric tons of hazardous wastes are generated each year. the united states alone produces about million metric tons. americans constitute less than of the worlds population but produce roughly of the worlds co and generate approximately of worlds waste. in china overtook the united states as the worlds biggest producer of co while still far behind based on per capita pollution. some of the more common soil contaminants are chlorinated hydrocarbons heavy metals mtbe zinc arsenic and benzene. in a series of press reports culminating in a book called fateful harvest unveiled a widespread practice of recycling industrial byproducts into fertilizer resulting in the contamination of the soil with various metals. ordinary municipal landfills are the source of many chemical substances entering the soil environment emanating from the wide variety of refuse accepted especially substances illegally discarded there or from pre landfills that may have been subject to little control in the u. s. or eu. there have also been some unusual releases of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins commonly called dioxins for simplicity such as tcdd. pollution can also be the consequence of a natural disaster. for example hurricanes often involve water contamination from sewage and petrochemical spills from ruptured boats or automobiles. larger scale and environmental damage is not uncommon when coastal oil rigs or refineries are involved. some sources of pollution such as nuclear power plants or oil tankers can produce widespread and potentially hazardous releases when accidents occur. in the case of noise pollution the dominant source class is the motor vehicle producing about ninety percent of all unwanted noise worldwide. carbon dioxide while vital for photosynthesis is sometimes referred to as pollution because raised levels of the gas in the atmosphere are affecting the earths climate. disruption of the environment can also highlight the connection between areas of pollution that would normally be classified separately such as those of water and air. recent studies have investigated the potential for long term rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide to cause slight but critical increases in the acidity of ocean waters and the possible effects of this on marine ecosystems. in february a report by the intergovernmental panel on climate change representing the work of scientists economists and policymakers from more than countries confirmed that humans have been the primary cause of global warming since. humans have ways to cut greenhouse gas emissions and avoid the consequences of global warming a major climate report concluded. but to change the climate the transition from fossil fuels like coal and oil needs to occur within decades according to the final report this year from the uns intergovernmental panel on climate change. adverse air quality can kill many organisms including humans. ozone pollution can cause respiratory disease cardiovascular disease throat inflammation chest pain and congestion. water pollution causes approximately deaths per day mostly due to contamination of drinking water by untreated sewage in developing countries. an estimated million indians have no access to a proper toilet over ten million people in india fell ill with waterborne illnesses in and people died most of them children. nearly million chinese lack access to safe drinking water. a analysis estimated that. million people died prematurely each year in china because of air pollution. the high smog levels china has been facing for a long time can do damage to civilians bodies and cause different diseases. the who estimated in that air pollution causes half a million deaths per year in india. studies have estimated that the number of people killed annually in the united states could be over. oil spills can cause skin irritations and rashes. noise pollution induces hearing loss high blood pressure stress and sleep disturbance. mercury has been linked to developmental deficits in children and neurologic symptoms. older people are majorly exposed to diseases induced by air pollution. those with heart or lung disorders are at additional risk. children and infants are also at serious risk. lead and other heavy metals have been shown to cause neurological problems. chemical and radioactive substances can cause cancer and as well as birth defects. an october study by the lancet commission on pollution and health found that global pollution specifically toxic air water soils and workplaces kills nine million people annually which is triple the number of deaths caused by aids tuberculosis and malaria combined and times higher than deaths caused by wars and other forms of human violence. the study concluded that pollution is one of the great existential challenges of the anthropocene era. pollution endangers the stability of the earth s support systems and threatens the continuing survival of human societies. pollution has been found to be present widely in the environment. there are a number of effects of this the toxicology and environmental health information program at the united states national library of medicine maintains a comprehensive toxicology and environmental health web site that includes access to resources produced by tehip and by other government agencies and organizations. this web site includes links to databases bibliographies tutorials and other scientific and consumer oriented resources. tehip also is responsible for the toxicology data network an integrated system of toxicology and environmental health databases that are available free of charge on the web. toxmap is a geographic information system that is part of toxnet. toxmap uses maps of the united states to help users visually explore data from the united states environmental protection agencys toxics release inventory and superfund basic research programs. a study found that exposure to pollution causes an increase in violent crime. a paper linked pollution to adverse school outcomes for children. a number of studies show that pollution has an adverse effect on the productivity of both indoor and outdoor workers. to protect the environment from the adverse effects of pollution many nations worldwide have enacted legislation to regulate various types of pollution as well as to mitigate the adverse effects of pollution. pollution control is a term used in environmental management. it means the control of emissions and effluents into air water or soil. without pollution control the waste products from overconsumption heating agriculture mining manufacturing transportation and other human activities whether they accumulate or disperse will degrade the environment. in the hierarchy of controls pollution prevention and waste minimization are more desirable than pollution control. in the field of land development low impact development is a similar technique for the prevention of urban runoff. pollution has a cost. manufacturing activities that cause air pollution impose health and clean up costs on the whole of society. a manufacturing activity that causes air pollution is an example of a negative externality in production. a negative externality in production occurs when a firm s production reduces the well being of others who are not compensated by the firm. for example if a laundry firm exists near a polluting steel manufacturing firm there will be increased costs for the laundry firm because of the dirt and smoke produced by the steel manufacturing firm. if external costs exist such as those created by pollution the manufacturer will choose to produce more of the product than would be produced if the manufacturer were required to pay all associated environmental costs. because responsibility or consequence for self directed action lies partly outside the self an element of externalization is involved. if there are external benefits such as in public safety less of the good may be produced than would be the case if the producer were to receive payment for the external benefits to others. however goods and services that involve negative externalities in production such as those that produce pollution tend to be over produced and underpriced since the externality is not being priced into the market. pollution can also create costs for the firms producing the pollution. sometimes firms choose or are forced by regulation to reduce the amount of pollution that they are producing. the associated costs of doing this are called abatement costs or marginal abatement costs if measured by each additional unit. in pollution abatement capital expenditures and operating costs in the us amounted to nearly billion. the pure earth an international non for profit organization dedicated to eliminating life threatening pollution in the developing world issues an annual list of some of the worlds most polluting industries. below is the list for a report by the institute for agriculture and trade policy and grain says that the meat and dairy industries are poised to surpass the oil industry as the worlds worst polluters. pure earth issues an annual list of some of the worlds worst polluted places. below is the list for society derives some indirect utility from pollution otherwise there would be no incentive to pollute. this utility comes from the consumption of goods and services that create pollution. therefore it is important that policymakers attempt to balance these indirect benefits with the costs of pollution in order to achieve an efficient outcome. it is possible to use environmental economics to determine which level of pollution is deemed the social optimum. for economists pollution is an external cost and occurs only when one or more individuals suffer a loss of welfare however there exists a socially optimal level of pollution at which welfare is maximized. this is because consumers derive utility from the good or service manufactured which will outweigh the social cost of pollution until a certain point. at this point the damage of one extra unit of pollution to society the marginal cost of pollution is exactly equal to the marginal benefit of consuming one more unit of the good or service. in markets with pollution or other negative externalities in production the free market equilibrium will not account for the costs of pollution on society. if the social costs of pollution are higher than the private costs incurred by the firm then the true supply curve will be higher. the point at which the social marginal cost and market demand intersect gives the socially optimal level of pollution. at this point the quantity will be lower and the price will be higher in comparison to the free market equilibrium. therefore the free market outcome could be considered a market failure because it does not maximize efficiency. this model can be used as a basis to evaluate different methods of internalizing the externality. some examples include tariffs a carbon tax and cap and trade systems. the earliest precursor of pollution generated by life forms would have been a natural function of their existence. the attendant consequences on viability and population levels fell within the sphere of natural selection. these would have included the demise of a population locally or ultimately species extinction. processes that were untenable would have resulted in a new balance brought about by changes and adaptations. at the extremes for any form of life consideration of pollution is superseded by that of survival. for humankind the factor of technology is a distinguishing and critical consideration both as an enabler and an additional source of byproducts. short of survival human concerns include the range from quality of life to health hazards. since science holds experimental demonstration to be definitive modern treatment of toxicity or environmental harm involves defining a level at which an effect is observable. common examples of fields where practical measurement is crucial include automobile emissions control industrial exposure pels toxicology and medicine. the solution to pollution is dilution is a dictum which summarizes a traditional approach to pollution management whereby sufficiently diluted pollution is not harmful. it is well suited to some other modern locally scoped applications such as laboratory safety procedure and hazardous material release emergency management. but it assumes that the diluent is in virtually unlimited supply for the application or that resulting dilutions are acceptable in all cases. such simple treatment for environmental pollution on a wider scale might have had greater merit in earlier centuries when physical survival was often the highest imperative human population and densities were lower technologies were simpler and their byproducts more benign. but these are often no longer the case. furthermore advances have enabled measurement of concentrations not possible before. the use of statistical methods in evaluating outcomes has given currency to the principle of probable harm in cases where assessment is warranted but resorting to deterministic models is impractical or infeasible. in addition consideration of the environment beyond direct impact on human beings has gained prominence. yet in the absence of a superseding principle this older approach predominates practices throughout the world. it is the basis by which to gauge concentrations of effluent for legal release exceeding which penalties are assessed or restrictions applied. one such superseding principle is contained in modern hazardous waste laws in developed countries as the process of diluting hazardous waste to make it non hazardous is usually a regulated treatment process. migration from pollution dilution to elimination in many cases can be confronted by challenging economical and technological barriers. air pollution has always accompanied civilizations. pollution started from prehistoric times when man created the first fires. according to a article in the journal science soot found on ceilings of prehistoric caves provides ample evidence of the high levels of pollution that was associated with inadequate ventilation of open fires. metal forging appears to be a key turning point in the creation of significant air pollution levels outside the home. core samples of glaciers in greenland indicate increases in pollution associated with greek roman and chinese metal production. the burning of coal and wood and the presence of many horses in concentrated areas made the cities the primary sources of pollution. king edward i of england banned the burning of sea coal by proclamation in london in after its smoke became a problem the fuel was so common in england that this earliest of names for it was acquired because it could be carted away from some shores by the wheelbarrow. it was the industrial revolution that gave birth to environmental pollution as we know it today. london also recorded one of the earlier extreme cases of water quality problems with the great stink on the thames of which led to construction of the london sewerage system soon afterward. pollution issues escalated as population growth far exceeded viability of neighborhoods to handle their waste problem. reformers began to demand sewer systems and clean water. in the sanitary conditions in berlin were among the worst in europe. august bebel recalled conditions before a modern sewer system was built in the late s waste water from the houses collected in the gutters running alongside the curbs and emitted a truly fearsome smell. there were no public toilets in the streets or squares. visitors especially women often became desperate when nature called. in the public buildings the sanitary facilities were unbelievably primitive.... as a metropolis berlin did not emerge from a state of barbarism into civilization until after. the primitive conditions were intolerable for a world national capital and the imperial german government brought in its scientists engineers and urban planners to not only solve the deficiencies but to forge berlin as the worlds model city. a british expert in concluded that berlin represented the most complete application of science order and method of public life adding it is a marvel of civic administration the most modern and most perfectly organized city that there is. the emergence of great factories and consumption of immense quantities of coal gave rise to unprecedented air pollution and the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste. chicago and cincinnati were the first two american cities to enact laws ensuring cleaner air in. pollution became a major issue in the united states in the early twentieth century as progressive reformers took issue with air pollution caused by coal burning water pollution caused by bad sanitation and street pollution caused by the million horses who worked in american cities in generating large quantities of urine and manure. as historian martin melosi notes the generation that first saw automobiles replacing the horses saw cars as miracles of cleanliness. by the s however automobile caused smog was a major issue in los angeles. other cities followed around the country until early in the century when the short lived office of air pollution was created under the department of the interior. extreme smog events were experienced by the cities of los angeles and donora pennsylvania in the late s serving as another public reminder. air pollution would continue to be a problem in england especially later during the industrial revolution and extending into the recent past with the great smog of. awareness of atmospheric pollution spread widely after world war ii with fears triggered by reports of radioactive fallout from atomic warfare and testing. then a non nuclear event the great smog of in london killed at least people. this prompted some of the first major modern environmental legislation the clean air act of. pollution began to draw major public attention in the united states between the mid s and early s when congress passed the noise control act the clean air act the clean water act and the national environmental policy act. severe incidents of pollution helped increase consciousness. pcb dumping in the hudson river resulted in a ban by the epa on consumption of its fish in. national news stories in the late s especially the long term dioxin contamination at love canal starting in and uncontrolled dumping in valley of the drums led to the superfund legislation of. the pollution of industrial land gave rise to the name brownfield a term now common in city planning. the development of nuclear science introduced radioactive contamination which can remain lethally radioactive for hundreds of thousands of years. lake karachay named by the worldwatch institute as the most polluted spot on earth served as a disposal site for the soviet union throughout the s and s. chelyabinsk russia is considered the most polluted place on the planet. nuclear weapons continued to be tested in the cold war especially in the earlier stages of their development. the toll on the worst affected populations and the growth since then in understanding about the critical threat to human health posed by radioactivity has also been a prohibitive complication associated with nuclear power. though extreme care is practiced in that industry the potential for disaster suggested by incidents such as those at three mile island chernobyl and fukushima pose a lingering specter of public mistrust. worldwide publicity has been intense on those disasters. widespread support for test ban treaties has ended almost all nuclear testing in the atmosphere. international catastrophes such as the wreck of the amoco cadiz oil tanker off the coast of brittany in and the bhopal disaster in have demonstrated the universality of such events and the scale on which efforts to address them needed to engage. the borderless nature of atmosphere and oceans inevitably resulted in the implication of pollution on a planetary level with the issue of global warming. most recently the term persistent organic pollutant has come to describe a group of chemicals such as pbdes and pfcs among others. though their effects remain somewhat less well understood owing to a lack of experimental data they have been detected in various ecological habitats far removed from industrial activity such as the arctic demonstrating diffusion and bioaccumulation after only a relatively brief period of widespread use. a much more recently discovered problem is the great pacific garbage patch a huge concentration of plastics chemical sludge and other debris which has been collected into a large area of the pacific ocean by the north pacific gyre. this is a less well known pollution problem than the others described above but nonetheless has multiple and serious consequences such as increasing wildlife mortality the spread of invasive species and human ingestion of toxic chemicals. organizations such as gyres have researched the pollution and along with artists like marina debris are working toward publicizing the issue. pollution introduced by light at night is becoming a global problem more severe in urban centres but nonetheless contaminating also large territories far away from towns. growing evidence of local and global pollution and an increasingly informed public over time have given rise to environmentalism and the environmental movement which generally seek to limit human impact on the environment. air pollutionsoil contaminationwater pollutionotherplastic pollution in ghana plastic pollution on the remote island of maui hawaiicategoriesplastic pollution is the accumulation of plastic objects and particles in the earths environment that adversely affects wildlife wildlife habitat and humans. plastics that act as pollutants are categorized by size into micro meso or macro debris. plastics are inexpensive and durable making them very adaptable for different uses as a result humans produce a lot of plastic. however the chemical structure of most plastics renders them resistant to many natural processes of degradation and as a result they are slow to degrade. together these two factors allow large volumes of plastic to enter the environment as mismanaged waste and for it to persist in the ecosystem. plastic pollution can afflict land waterways and oceans. it is estimated that. to. million tonnes of plastic waste enters the ocean from coastal communities each year. it is estimated that there is a stock of million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of with an assumption that. of global plastics produced from to has entered the ocean and has accumulated there. some researchers suggest that by there could be more plastic than fish in the oceans by weight. living organisms particularly marine animals can be harmed either by mechanical effects such as entanglement in plastic objects problems related to ingestion of plastic waste or through exposure to chemicals within plastics that interfere with their physiology. degraded plastic waste can directly affect humans through both direct consumption indirect consumption and disruption of various hormonal mechanisms. as of million tonnes of plastic is produced each year in asia where china is the worlds largest producer. from the s up to an estimated. billion tonnes of plastic has been produced worldwide of which an estimated has been recycled and another has been incinerated. this large amount of plastic waste enters the environment with studies suggesting that the bodies of of seabirds contain plastic debris. in some areas there have been significant efforts to reduce the prominence of free range plastic pollution through reducing plastic consumption litter cleanup and promoting plastic recycling. as of the global mass of produced plastic exceeds the biomass of all land and marine animals combined. a may amendment to the basel convention regulates the exportation importation of plastic waste largely intended to prevent the shipping of plastic waste from developed countries to developing countries. nearly all countries have joined this agreement. the trade in plastic waste has been identified as a main culprit of marine litter. countries importing the waste plastics often lack the capacity to process all the material. as a result the united nations has imposed a ban on waste plastic trade unless it meets certain criteria. there are three major forms of plastic that contribute to plastic pollution micro macro and mega plastics. mega and micro plastics have accumulated in highest densities in the northern hemisphere concentrated around urban centers and water fronts. plastic can be found off the coast of some islands because of currents carrying the debris. both mega and macro plastics are found in packaging footwear and other domestic items that have been washed off of ships or discarded in landfills. fishing related items are more likely to be found around remote islands. these may also be referred to as micro meso and macro debris. plastic debris is categorized as either primary or secondary. primary plastics are in their original form when collected. examples of these would be bottle caps cigarette butts and microbeads. secondary plastics on the other hand account for smaller plastics that have resulted from the degradation of primary plastics. microdebris are plastic pieces between mm and mm in size. plastic debris that starts off as meso or macrodebris can become microdebris through degradation and collisions that break it down into smaller pieces. microdebris is more commonly referred to as nurdles. nurdles are recycled to make new plastic items but they easily end up released into the environment during production because of their small size. they often end up in ocean waters through rivers and streams. microdebris that come from cleaning and cosmetic products are also referred to as scrubbers. because microdebris and scrubbers are so small in size filter feeding organisms often consume them. nurdles enter the ocean by means of spills during transportation or from land based sources. the ocean conservancy reported that china indonesia philippines thailand and vietnam dump more plastic in the sea than all other countries combined. it is estimated that of the plastics in the ocean are nurdles making them one of the most common types of plastic pollution along with plastic bags and food containers. these micro plastics can accumulate in the oceans and allow for the accumulation of persistent bio accumulating toxins such as bisphenol a polystyrene ddt and pcbs which are hydrophobic in nature and can cause adverse health affects. a study by richard thompson from the university of plymouth uk found a great amount of microdebris on the beaches and waters in europe the americas australia africa and antarctica. thompson and his associates found that plastic pellets from both domestic and industrial sources were being broken down into much smaller plastic pieces some having a diameter smaller than human hair. if not ingested this microdebris floats instead of being absorbed into the marine environment. thompson predicts there may be plastic items per square kilometre of sea surface and plastic particles per square kilometre of seabed. international pellet watch collected samples of polythene pellets from beaches from countries which were then analysed for organic micro pollutants. it was found that pellets found on beaches in the u. s. vietnam and southern africa contained compounds from pesticides suggesting a high use of pesticides in the areas. in scientists created what may be the first scientific estimate of how much microplastic currently resides in earths seafloor after investigating six areas of km depth km off the australian coast. they found the highly variable microplastic counts to be proportionate to plastic on the surface and the angle of the seafloor slope. by averaging the microplastic mass per cm they estimated that earths seafloor contains million tons of microplastic about double the amount they estimated based on data from earlier studies despite calling both estimates conservative as coastal areas are known to contain much more microplastic. these estimates are about one to two times the amount of plastic thought per jambeck et al. to currently enter the oceans annually. plastic debris is categorized as macrodebris when it is larger than mm. these include items such as plastic grocery bags. macrodebris are often found in ocean waters and can have a serious impact on the native organisms. fishing nets have been prime pollutants. even after they have been abandoned they continue to trap marine organisms and other plastic debris. eventually these abandoned nets become too difficult to remove from the water because they become too heavy having grown in weight up to tonnes. plastics themselves contribute to approximately of discarded waste. many kinds of plastics exist depending on their precursors and the method for their polymerization. depending on their chemical composition plastics and resins have varying properties related to contaminant absorption and adsorption. polymer degradation takes much longer as a result of saline environments and the cooling effect of the sea. these factors contribute to the persistence of plastic debris in certain environments. recent studies have shown that plastics in the ocean decompose faster than was once thought due to exposure to sun rain and other environmental conditions resulting in the release of toxic chemicals such as bisphenol a. however due to the increased volume of plastics in the ocean decomposition has slowed down. the marine conservancy has predicted the decomposition rates of several plastic products. it is estimated that a foam plastic cup will take years a plastic beverage holder will take years a disposable nappy will take years and fishing line will take years to degrade. it was estimated that global production of plastics is approximately mt yr. their abundance has been found to transport persistent organic pollutants also known as pops. these pollutants have been linked to an increased distribution of algae associated with red tides. in the group break free from plastic organized over volunteers in countries to collect and identify plastic waste. these volunteers collected over plastic bags sachets and plastic bottles as reported by the guardian. nearly half of the items were identifiable by consumer brands. the most common brands were coca cola nestl and pepsico. according to the global campaign coordinator for the project emma priestland in the only way to solve the problem is stopping production of single use plastic and using reusable products instead. china is the biggest consumer of single use plastics. coca cola answered that more than of our portfolio comes in refillable or fountain packaging they are decreasing the amount of plastic in secondary packaging. nestl responded that of their packaging and of their plastic packaging can be reused or recycled and by they want to make it. by that year they want to reduce the consumption of virgin plastic by one third. pepsico responded that they want to decrease virgin plastic in our beverage business by by and also expanding reuse and refill practices what should prevent billion single use bottles by. top mismanaged plastic waste pollutersin approximate million tonnes of plastics wind up in the oceans every year out of which the is from the following countries china is the most mismanaged plastic waste polluter leaving in the sea the. of the world total second indonesia with the. third philippines with. fourth vietnam with. fifth sri lanka. sixth thailand with. seventh egypt with. eighth malaysia with. ninth nigeria with. tenth bangladesh with. eleventh south africa with. twelfth india with. thirteenth algeria with. fourteenth turkey with. fifteenth pakistan with. sixteenth brazil with. seventeenth myanmar with. eighteenth morocco with. nineteenth north korea with. twentieth united states with.. the rest of worlds countries combined wind up the. of the mismanaged plastic waste in the oceans according to a study published by science jambeck et al. in a new study revised the potential u. s. contribution to mismanaged plastic. it estimated an annual.. metric tons was mismanaged in the countries to which the u. s. exported plastics for recycling and an. and. metric tons was illegally dumped in the u. s. itself. thus the amount of u. s. generated plastic estimated to enter the ocean environment could range as high as. mt placing the u. s. behind indonesia and india in oceanic pollution or as low as. mt placing the u. s. behind indonesia india thailand china brazil philippines egypt japan russia and vietnam. the authors noted that sincehina ceased importing plastics for recycling and since international treaties restricted the export of plastics for recycling. all the european union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list. a study calculated the mismanaged plastic waste in millions of metric tonnes per year around million tonnes of plastic waste is generated each year around the world between. million and. million tonnes is dumped into the sea. about of the plastic waste in the ocean comes from the following top countries. the table below list the top plastic waste polluting countries in according to a study published by science jambeck et al. all the european union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list. in a study published by environmental science technology schmidt et al calculated that rivers two in africa and eight in asia transport of the global plastics load into the sea.. the caribbean islands are the biggest plastic polluters per capita in the world. trinidad and tobago produces. kilograms of waste per capita per day is the biggest plastic polluter per capita in the world. at least. kg per person per day of trinidad and tobagos plastic debris end up in the ocean or for example saint lucia which generates more than four times the amount of plastic waste per capita as china and is responsible for. times more improperly disposed plastic waste per capita than china. of the top thirty global polluters per capita ten are from the caribbean region. these are trinidad and tobago antigua and barbuda saint kitts and nevis guyana barbados saint lucia bahamas grenada anguilla and aruba according to a set of studies summarized by forbes. the distribution of plastic debris is highly variable as a result of certain factors such as wind and ocean currents coastline geography urban areas and trade routes. human population in certain areas also plays a large role in this. plastics are more likely to be found in enclosed regions such as the caribbean. it serves as a means of distribution of organisms to remote coasts that are not their native environments. this could potentially increase the variability and dispersal of organisms in specific areas that are less biologically diverse. plastics can also be used as vectors for chemical contaminants such as persistent organic pollutants and heavy metals. in a new report plastic and climate was published. according to the report in production and incineration of plastic will contribute greenhouse gases in the equivalent of million tonnes of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. in current trend annual emissions from these sources will grow to. billion tonnes by. by plastic could emit billion tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions as much as percent of the earths remaining carbon budget. by it will emit billion tonnes more than half of the carbon budget. those are emission from production transportation incineration but there are also releases of methane and effects on phytoplankton. plastic pollution on land poses a threat to the plants and animals including humans who are based on the land. estimates of the amount of plastic concentration on land are between four and twenty three times that of the ocean. the amount of plastic poised on the land is greater and more concentrated than that in the water. mismanaged plastic waste ranges from percent in east asia and pacific to one percent in north america. the percentage of mismanaged plastic waste reaching the ocean annually and thus becoming plastic marine debris is between one third and one half the total mismanaged waste for that year. chlorinated plastic can release harmful chemicals into the surrounding soil which can then seep into groundwater or other surrounding water sources and also the ecosystem of the world. this can cause serious harm to the species that drink the water. a study found that of tap water samples taken around the world contained plastic pollutants. this was the first study to focus on global drinking water pollution with plastics and showed that with a contamination rate of tap water in the united states was the most polluted followed by lebanon and india. european countries such as the united kingdom germany and france had the lowest contamination rate though still as high as. this means that people may be ingesting between and microparticles of plastic from tap water per year. the analysis found particles of more than. microns in size which is times bigger than a nanometer. it is currently unclear if this contamination is affecting human health but if the water is also found to contain nano particle pollutants there could be adverse impacts on human well being according to scientists associated with the study. however plastic tap water pollution remains under studied as are the links of how pollution transfers between humans air water and soil. plastic waste can clog storm drains and such clogging can increase flood damage particularly in urban areas. for example in bangkok flood risk increases substantially because of plastic waste clogging the already overburdened sewer system. marine plastic pollution is a type of marine pollution by plastics ranging in size from large original material such as bottles and bags down to microplastics formed from the fragmentation of plastic material. marine debris is mainly discarded human rubbish which floats on or is suspended in the ocean. eighty percent of marine debris is plastic. microplastics and nanoplastics result from the breakdown or photodegradation of plastic waste in surface waters rivers or oceans. it is estimated that there is a stock of million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of assuming that. of global plastics produced from to has entered the ocean and has accumulated there. the united nations ocean conference estimated that the oceans might contain more weight in plastics than fish by the yearompounds that are used in manufacturing pollute the environment by releasing chemicals into the air and water. some compounds that are used in plastics such as phthalates bisphenol a polybrominated diphenyl ether are under close statute and might be very hurtful. even though these compounds are unsafe they have been used in the manufacturing of food packaging medical devices flooring materials bottles perfumes cosmetics and much more. the large dosage of these compounds are hazardous to humans destroying the endocrine system. bra imitates the females hormone called estrogen. pbd destroys and causes damage to thyroid hormones which are vital hormone glands that play a major role in the metabolism growth and development of the human body. although the level of exposure to these chemicals varies depending on age and geography most humans experience simultaneous exposure to many of these chemicals. average levels of daily exposure are below the levels deemed to be unsafe but more research needs to be done on the effects of low dose exposure on humans. a lot is unknown on how severely humans are physically affected by these chemicals. some of the chemicals used in plastic production can cause dermatitis upon contact with human skin. in many plastics these toxic chemicals are only used in trace amounts but significant testing is often required to ensure that the toxic elements are contained within the plastic by inert material or polymer. children and women during their reproduction age are at most at risk and more prone to damaging their immune as well as their reproductive system from these hormone disrupting chemicals. it can also affect humans because it may create an eyesore that interferes with enjoyment of the natural environment. due to the pervasiveness of plastic products most of the human population is constantly exposed to the chemical components of plastics. of adults in the united states have had detectable levels of bpa in their urine. exposure to chemicals such as bpa have been correlated with disruptions in fertility reproduction sexual maturation and other health effects. specific phthalates have also resulted in similar biological effects. bisphenol a affects gene expression related to the thyroid hormone axis which affects biological functions such as metabolism and development. bpa can decrease thyroid hormone receptor activity by increasing tr transcriptional corepressor activity. this then decreases the level of thyroid hormone binding proteins that bind to triiodothyronine. by affecting the thyroid hormone axis bpa exposure can lead to hypothyroidism. bpa can disrupt normal physiological levels of sex hormones. it does this by binding to globulins that normally bind to sex hormones such as androgens and estrogens leading to the disruption of the balance between the two. bpa can also affect the metabolism or the catabolism of sex hormones. it often acts as an antiandrogen or as an estrogen which can cause disruptions in gonadal development and sperm production. efforts to reduce the use of plastics to promote plastic recycling and to reduce mismanaged plastic waste or plastic pollution have occurred or are ongoing. the first scientific review in the professional academic literature about global plastic pollution in general found that the rational response to the global threat would be reductions in consumption of virgin plastic materials along with internationally coordinated strategies for waste management such as banning export of plastic waste unless it leads to better recycling and describes the state of knowledge about poorly reversible impacts which are one of the rationales for its reduction. some supermarkets charge their customers for plastic bags and in some places more efficient reusable or biodegradable materials are being used in place of plastics. some communities and businesses have put a ban on some commonly used plastic items such as bottled water and plastic bags. some non governmental organizations have launched voluntary plastic reduction schemes like certificates that can be adapted by restaurants to be recognized as eco friendly among customers. in january a global alliance to end plastic waste was created by companies in the plastics industry. the alliance aims to clean the environment from existing waste and increase recycling but it does not mention reduction in plastic production as one of its targets. the use of biodegradable plastics has many advantages and disadvantages. biodegradables are biopolymers that degrade in industrial composters. biodegradables do not degrade as efficiently in domestic composters and during this slower process methane gas may be emitted. there are also other types of degradable materials that are not considered to be biopolymers because they are oil based similar to other conventional plastics. these plastics are made to be more degradable through the use of different additives which help them degrade when exposed to uv rays or other physical stressors. yet biodegradation promoting additives for polymers have been shown not to significantly increase biodegradation. although biodegradable and degradable plastics have helped reduce plastic pollution there are some drawbacks. one issue concerning both types of plastics is that they do not break down very efficiently in natural environments. there degradable plastics that are oil based may break down into smaller fractions at which point they do not degrade further. a parliamentary committee in the united kingdom also found that compostable and biodegradable plastics could add to marine pollution because there is a lack of infrastructure to deal with these new types of plastic as well as a lack of understanding about them on the part of consumers. for example these plastics need to be sent to industrial composting facilities to degrade properly but no adequate system exists to make sure waste reaches these facilities. the committee thus recommended to reduce the amount of plastic used rather than introducing new types of it to the market. up to of used plastic medical equipment is incinerated rather than deposited in a landfill as a precautionary measure to lessen the transmission of disease. this has allowed for a large decrease in the amount of plastic waste that stems from medical equipment. at a large scale plastics paper and other materials provides waste to energy plants with useful fuel. about of total produced plastic has been incinerated. many studies have been done concerning the gaseous emissions that result from the incineration process. incinerated plastics release a number of toxins in the burning process including dioxins furans mercury and polychlorinated biphenyls. when burned outside of facilities designed to collect or process the toxins this can have significant health effects and create significant air pollution. agencies such as the us environmental protection agency and us food and drug administration often do not assess the safety of new chemicals until after a negative side effect is shown. once they suspect a chemical may be toxic it is studied to determine the human reference dose which is determined to be the lowest observable adverse effect level. during these studies a high dose is tested to see if it causes any adverse health effects and if it does not lower doses are considered to be safe as well. this does not take into account the fact that with some chemicals found in plastics such as bpa lower doses can have a discernible effect. even with this often complex evaluation process policies have been put into place in order to help alleviate plastic pollution and its effects. government regulations have been implemented that ban some chemicals from being used in specific plastic products. in canada the united states and the european union bpa has been banned from being incorporated in the production of baby bottles and childrens cups due to health concerns and the higher vulnerability of younger children to the effects of bpa. taxes have been established in order to discourage specific ways of managing plastic waste. the landfill tax for example creates an incentive to choose to recycle plastics rather than contain them in landfills by making the latter more expensive. there has also been a standardization of the types of plastics that can be considered compostable. the european norm en which was set by the european committee for standardization lists the standards that plastics must meet in terms of compostability and biodegradability in order to officially be labeled as compostable. given the significant threat that oceans face the european investment bank group aims to increase its funding and advisory assistance for ocean cleanup. for example the clean oceans initiative was established in. the european investment bank the german development bank and the french development agency agreed to invest a total of billion under the coi from october to october in initiatives aimed at reducing pollution discharge into the oceans with a special focus on plastics. major plastic producers continue to lobby governments to refrain from imposing restrictions on plastic production and to advocate for voluntary corporate targets to reduce new plastic output. however the worlds top plastic producers including the coca cola company nestle sa and pepsico have been failing to meet even their own minimum targets for virgin plastic use. there have been several international covenants which address marine plastic pollution such as the convention on the prevention of marine pollution by dumping of wastes and other matter the international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships and the honolulu strategy there is nothing around plastics which infiltrate the ocean from the land. in countries agreed to limit the amount of plastic waste that rich countries export to poorer countries using rules from the basel convention. however during january the first month that the agreement was in effect trade data showed that overall scrap exports actually increased. some academics and ngos believe that a legally binding international treaty to deal with plastic pollution is necessary. they think this because plastic pollution is an international problem moving between maritime borders and also because they believe there needs to be a cap on plastic production. lobbyists were hoping that unea would lead to a plastics treaty but the session ended without a legally binding agreement. the canadian federal government formed a current institution that protects marine areas this includes the mitigation of plastic pollution. in canada adopted legislation for oceans management and passed the oceans act. federal governance regional governance and aboriginal peoples are the actors involved in the process of decision making and implementation of the decision. the regional governance bodies are federal provincial and territorial government agencies that hold responsibilities of the marine environment. aboriginal peoples in canada have treaty and non treaty rights related to ocean activities. according to the canadian government they respect these rights and work with aboriginal groups in oceans management activities. with the oceans act made legal canada made a commitment to conserve and protect the oceans. the ocean acts underlying principle is sustainable development precautionary and integrated management approach to ensure that there is a comprehensive understanding in protecting marine areas. in the integrated management approach the oceans act designates federal responsibility to the minister of fisheries and oceans canada for any new and emerging ocean related activities. the act encourages collaboration and coordination within the government that unifies interested parties. moreover the oceans act engages any canadians who are interested in being informed of the decision making regarding ocean environment. in federal organizations developed the federal marine protected areas strategy. this strategy is a collaborative approach implemented by fisheries and oceans canada parks canada and environment canada to plan and manage federal marine protected areas. the federal marine protected areas work with aboriginal groups industries academia environmental groups and ngos to strengthen marine protected areas. the federal marine protected areas network consists of three core programs marine protected areas marine wildlife areas and national marine conservation areas. the mpa is a program to be noted because it is significant in protecting ecosystems from the effects of industrial activities. the mpa guiding principles are integrated management ecosystem based management approach adaptive management approach precautionary principle and flexible management approach. all five guiding principles are used collectively and simultaneously to collaborate and respect legislative mandates of individual departments to use scientific knowledge and traditional ecological knowledge to manage human activities to monitor and report on programs to meet conservation objectives of mpas to use best available information in the absence of scientific certainty and to maintain a balance between conservation needs and sustainable development objectives. inanadas government officially recognize plastic as toxic material what creates the possibility to limit its consumption in different ways. the two common forms of waste collection include curbside collection and the use of drop off recycling centers. about percent of the population in the united states have access to curbside and drop off recycling centers. in curbside collection which is available to about percent of the united states population people place designated plastics in a special bin to be picked up by a public or private hauling company. most curbside programs collect more than one type of plastic resin usually both pete and hdpe. at drop off recycling centers which are available to percent of the united states population people take their recyclables to a centrally located facility. once collected the plastics are delivered to a materials recovery facility or handler for sorting into single resin streams to increase product value. the sorted plastics are then baled to reduce shipping costs to reclaimers. there are varying rates of recycling per type of plastic and in the overall plastic recycling rate was approximately. in the united states. approximately. million tonnes of plastics were recycled in the u. s. in while. million tonnes plastic were dumped in landfills the same year. some plastics are recycled more than others in about. percent of hdpe bottles and. percent of pet bottles and jars were recycled. in may a new service model called loop to collect packaging from consumers and reuse it began to function in the new york region us. consumers drop packages in special shipping totes and then a pick up collect them. partners include procter gamble nestl pepsico unilever mars petcare the clorox company the body shop coca cola mondelz danone and other firms. it has begun with several thousand households but there are on the waiting list. the target of the service is not only stop single use plastic but to stop single use generally by recycling consumer product containers of various materials. the organization the ocean cleanup is trying to collect plastic waste from the oceans by nets. there are concerns from harm to some forms of sea organisms especially neuston. in the european union adopted a directive requiring a reduction in the consumption of single use plastic bags per person to by the year and to by the year. in april the eu adopted a further directive banning almost all types of single use plastic except bottles from the beginning of the yearhina is the biggest consumer of single use plastics. inhina published a plan to cut of plastic waste in years. as part of this plan single use plastic bags and straws will be bannedthe government of india decided to ban single use plastics and take a number of measures to recycle and reuse plastic from october the ministry of drinking water and sanitation government of india has requested various governmental departments to avoid the use of plastic bottles to provide drinking water during governmental meetings etc. and to instead make arrangements for providing drinking water that do not generate plastic waste. the state of sikkim has restricted the usage of plastic water bottles and styrofoam products. the state of bihar has banned the usage of plastic water bottles in governmental meetings. the national games of india organised in thiruvananthapuram was associated with green protocols. this was initiated by suchitwa mission that aimed for zero waste venues. to make the event disposable free there was ban on the usage of disposable water bottles. the event witnessed the usage of reusable tableware and stainless steel tumblers. athletes were provided with refillable steel flasks. it is estimated that these green practices stopped the generation of tonnes of disposable waste. the city of bangalore in banned the plastic for all purpose other than for few special cases like milk delivery etc. the state of maharashtra india effected the maharashtra plastic and thermocol products ban june subjecting plastic users to fines and potential imprisonment for repeat offenders. in july albania became the first country in europe to ban lightweight plastic bags. albanias environment minister blendi klosi said that businesses importing producing or trading plastic bags less than microns in thickness risk facing fines between million to. million lek. in bali a pair of two sisters melati and isabel wijsen have gone through efforts to ban plastic bags in. their organization bye bye plastic bags has spread to locations around the world. in washington university in st. louis became the first university in the united states to ban the sale of plastic single use water bottles. in district of columbia required all businesses that sell food or alcohol to charge an additional cents for each carryout plastic or paper bag. in and kauai maui and hawaii prohibit non biodegradable plastic bags at checkout as well as paper bags containing less than percent recycled material. in honolulu was the last major county approving the ban. in california prohibited large stores from providing plastic bags and if so a charge of. per bag and has to meet certain criteria. in illinois adopted the legislation and established recycle thin film friday in effort toe reclaim used thin film plastic bags and encourage reusable bags. in the new york banned single use plastic bags and introduced a cent fee for using single use paper bags. the ban will enter into force in. this will not only reduce plastic bag usage in new york state but also eliminate million barrels of oil used to make plastic bags used by the state each year. the state of maine ban styrofoam containers in may. in the giant eagle retailer became the first big us retailer that committed to completely phase out plastic by. the first step stop using single use plastic bags will begun to be implemented already on january. in delaware maine oregon and vermont enacted on legislation. vermont also restricted single use straws and polystyrene containers. in connecticut imposed a. charge on single use plastic bags at point of sale and is going to ban them on july. in the house of representatives of nigeria banned the production import and usage of plastic bags in the country. in israel cities eilat and herzliya decided to ban the usage of single use plastic bags and cutlery on the beaches. in tel aviv joined them banning also the sale of single use plastic on the beaches. in january the iceland supermarket chain which specializes in frozen foods pledged to eliminate or drastically reduce all plastic packaging for its store brand products by. as of communities achieved the title of plastic free community in united kingdom want to achieve it. after schoolgirls ella and caitlin launched a petition about it burger king and mcdonalds in the united kingdom and ireland pledged to stop sending plastic toys with their meals. mcdonalds pledged to do it from the year. mcdonalds also pledged to use a paper wrap for it meals and books that will be sent with the meals. the transmission will begin already in march. kenyain august kenya has one of the worlds harshest plastic bag bans. fines of or up to four years in jail to anyone that was caught producing selling or using a plastic bag. vanuatuon july vanuatu s independence day made an announcement of stepping towards the beginning of not using plastic bags and bottles. making it one of the first pacific nations to do so and will start banning the importation of single use plastic bottles and bags. taiwanin february taiwan restricted the use of single use plastic cups straws utensils and bags the ban will also include an extra charge for plastic bags and updates their recycling regulations and aiming by it would be completely enforced. the country announced a ban on many types of hard to recycle single use plastic by the ten corporations that produce the most plastic on the planet the coca cola company colgate palmolive danone mars incorporated mondelz international nestl pepsico perfetti van melle procter gamble and unilever formed a well financed network that has sabotaged for decades government and community efforts to address the plastic pollution crisis according to a detailed investigative report by the changing markets foundation. the investigation documents how these companies delay and derail legislation so that they can continue to inundate consumers with disposable plastic packaging. these large plastic producers have exploited public fears of the covid pandemic to work toward delaying and reversing existing regulation of plastic disposal. big ten plastic producers have advanced voluntary commitments for plastic waste disposal as a stratagem to deter governments from imposing additional regulations. as early as the early s petrochemical industry leaders understood that the vast majority of plastic they produced would never be recycled. for example an april report written by industry scientists for industry executive states that sorting the hundreds of different kinds plastic is infeasible and cost prohibitive. by the late s industry leaders also knew that the public must be kept feeling good about purchasing plastic products if their industry was to continue to prosper and needed to quell proposed legislation to regulate the plastic being sold. so the industry launched a million year corporate propaganda campaign targeting the american public with the message that plastic can be and is being recycled and lobbied american municipalities to launch expensive plastic waste collection programs and lobbied u. s. states to require the labeling of plastic products and containers with recycling symbols. they were confident however that the recycling initiatives would not end up recovering and reusing plastic in amounts anywhere near sufficient to hurt their profits in selling new virgin plastic products because they understood that the recycling efforts that they were promoting were likely to fail. industry leaders more recently have planned recycling of the plastic they produce by calling for more efficient collection sorting and processing. in the earth day network partnered with keep america beautiful and national cleanup day for the inaugural nationwide earth day cleanup. cleanups were held in all states five us territories sites and had more than volunteers. earth day is the anniversary of earth day. celebrations will include activities such as the great global cleanup citizen science advocacy education and art. this earth day aims to educate and mobilize more than one billion people to grow and support the next generation of environmental activists with a major focus on plastic wasteevery year june is observed as world environment day to raise awareness and increase government action on the pressing issue. in india was host to the world environment day and the theme was beat plastic pollution with a focus on single use or disposable plastic. the ministry of environment forest and climate change of india invited people to take care of their social responsibility and urged them to take up green good deeds in everyday life. several states presented plans to ban plastic or drastically reduce their use. on april in order to create awareness artist maria cristina finucci founded the garbage patch state at unesco headquarters in paris france in front of director general irina bokova. this was the first of a series of events under the patronage of unesco and of the italian ministry of the environment. categoriessoil contamination soil pollution or land pollution as a part of land degradation is caused by the presence of xenobiotic chemicals or other alteration in the natural soil environment. it is typically caused by industrial activity agricultural chemicals or improper disposal of waste. the most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons pyrene solvents pesticides lead and other heavy metals. contamination is correlated with the degree of industrialization and intensity of chemical substance. the concern over soil contamination stems primarily from health risks from direct contact with the contaminated soil vapour from the contaminants or from secondary contamination of water supplies within and underlying the soil. mapping of contaminated soil sites and the resulting cleanups are time consuming and expensive tasks requiring extensive amounts of geology hydrology chemistry computer modeling skills and gis in environmental contamination as well as an appreciation of the history of industrial chemistry. in north america and western europe the extent of contaminated land is best known with many of countries in these areas having a legal framework to identify and deal with this environmental problem. developing countries tend to be less tightly regulated despite some of them having undergone significant industrialization. soil pollution can be caused by the following the most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons solvents pesticides lead and other heavy metals. any activity that leads to other forms of soil degradation may indirectly worsen the contamination effects in that soil remediation becomes more tedious. historical deposition of coal ash used for residential commercial and industrial heating as well as for industrial processes such as ore smelting were a common source of contamination in areas that were industrialized before about. coal naturally concentrates lead and zinc during its formation as well as other heavy metals to a lesser degree. when the coal is burned most of these metals become concentrated in the ash. coal ash and slag may contain sufficient lead to qualify as a characteristic hazardous waste defined in the us as containing more than mg l of extractable lead using the tclp procedure. in addition to lead coal ash typically contains variable but significant concentrations of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons anthracene benzofluoranthene benzofluoranthene benzopyrene indenopyrene phenanthrene anthracene and others. these pahs are known human carcinogens and the acceptable concentrations of them in soil are typically around mg kg. coal ash and slag can be recognised by the presence of off white grains in soil gray heterogeneous soil or bubbly vesicular pebble sized grains. treated sewage sludge known in the industry as biosolids has become controversial as a fertilizer. as it is the byproduct of sewage treatment it generally contains more contaminants such as organisms pesticides and heavy metals than other soil. in the european union the urban waste water treatment directive allows sewage sludge to be sprayed onto land. the volume is expected to double to tons of dry solids in. this has good agricultural properties due to the high nitrogen and phosphate content. in wet weight was sprayed onto. of the land however this is expected to rise fold by. advocates say there is a need to control this so that pathogenic microorganisms do not get into water courses and to ensure that there is no accumulation of heavy metals in the top soil. a pesticide is a substance used to kill a pest. a pesticide may be a chemical substance biological agent antimicrobial disinfectant or device used against any pest. pests include insects plant pathogens weeds mollusks birds mammals fish nematodes and microbes that compete with humans for food destroy property spread or are a vector for disease or cause a nuisance. although there are benefits to the use of pesticides there are also drawbacks such as potential toxicity to humans and other organisms. herbicides are used to kill weeds especially on pavements and railways. they are similar to auxins and most are biodegradable by soil bacteria. however one group derived from trinitrotoluene have the impurity dioxin which is very toxic and causes fatality even in low concentrations. another herbicide is paraquat. it is highly toxic but it rapidly degrades in soil due to the action of bacteria and does not kill soil fauna. insecticides are used to rid farms of pests which damage crops. the insects damage not only standing crops but also stored ones and in the tropics it is reckoned that one third of the total production is lost during food storage. as with fungicides the first insecticides used in the nineteenth century were inorganic e. g. paris green and other compounds of arsenic. nicotine has also been used since the late eighteenth century. there are now two main groups of synthetic insecticides. organochlorines include ddt aldrin dieldrin and bhc. they are cheap to produce potent and persistent. ddt was used on a massive scale from the s with a peak of tonnes used. then usage fell as the harmful environmental effects were realized. it was found worldwide in fish and birds and was even discovered in the snow in the antarctic. it is only slightly soluble in water but is very soluble in the bloodstream. it affects the nervous and endocrine systems and causes the eggshells of birds to lack calcium causing them to be easily breakable. it is thought to be responsible for the decline of the numbers of birds of prey like ospreys and peregrine falcons in the s they are now recovering. as well as increased concentration via the food chain it is known to enter via permeable membranes so fish get it through their gills. as it has low water solubility it tends to stay at the water surface so organisms that live there are most affected. ddt found in fish that formed part of the human food chain caused concern but the levels found in the liver kidney and brain tissues was less than ppm and in fat was ppm which was below the level likely to cause harm. however ddt was banned in the uk and the united states to stop the further buildup of it in the food chain. u. s. manufacturers continued to sell ddt to developing countries who could not afford the expensive replacement chemicals and who did not have such stringent regulations governing the use of pesticides... organophosphates e. g. parathion methyl parathion and about other insecticides are available nationally. parathion is highly toxic methyl parathion is less so and malathion is generally considered safe as it has low toxicity and is rapidly broken down in the mammalian liver. this group works by preventing normal nerve transmission as cholinesterase is prevented from breaking down the transmitter substance acetylcholine resulting in uncontrolled muscle movements. the disposal of munitions and a lack of care in manufacture of munitions caused by the urgency of production can contaminate soil for extended periods. there is little published evidence on this type of contamination largely because of restrictions placed by governments of many countries on the publication of material related to war effort. however mustard gas stored during world war ii has contaminated some sites for up to years and the testing of anthrax as a potential biological weapon contaminated the whole island of gruinard. contaminated or polluted soil directly affects human health through direct contact with soil or via inhalation of soil contaminants which have vaporized potentially greater threats are posed by the infiltration of soil contamination into groundwater aquifers used for human consumption sometimes in areas apparently far removed from any apparent source of above ground contamination. this tends to result in the development of pollution related diseases. health consequences from exposure to soil contamination vary greatly depending on pollutant type pathway of attack and vulnerability of the exposed population. chronic exposure to chromium lead and other metals petroleum solvents and many pesticide and herbicide formulations can be carcinogenic can cause congenital disorders or can cause other chronic health conditions. industrial or man made concentrations of naturally occurring substances such as nitrate and ammonia associated with livestock manure from agricultural operations have also been identified as health hazards in soil and groundwater. chronic exposure to benzene at sufficient concentrations is known to be associated with higher incidence of leukemia. mercury and cyclodienes are known to induce higher incidences of kidney damage and some irreversible diseases. pcbs and cyclodienes are linked to liver toxicity. organophosphates and carbonates can induce a chain of responses leading to neuromuscular blockage. many chlorinated solvents induce liver changes kidney changes and depression of the central nervous system. there is an entire spectrum of further health effects such as headache nausea fatigue eye irritation and skin rash for the above cited and other chemicals. at sufficient dosages a large number of soil contaminants can cause death by exposure via direct contact inhalation or ingestion of contaminants in groundwater contaminated through soil. the scottish government has commissioned the institute of occupational medicine to undertake a review of methods to assess risk to human health from contaminated land. the overall aim of the project is to work up guidance that should be useful to scottish local authorities in assessing whether sites represent a significant possibility of significant harm to human health. it is envisaged that the output of the project will be a short document providing high level guidance on health risk assessment with reference to existing published guidance and methodologies that have been identified as being particularly relevant and helpful. the project will examine how policy guidelines have been developed for determining the acceptability of risks to human health and propose an approach for assessing what constitutes unacceptable risk in line with the criteria for sposh as defined in the legislation and the scottish statutory guidance. not unexpectedly soil contaminants can have significant deleterious consequences for ecosystems. there are radical soil chemistry changes which can arise from the presence of many hazardous chemicals even at low concentration of the contaminant species. these changes can manifest in the alteration of metabolism of endemic microorganisms and arthropods resident in a given soil environment. the result can be virtual eradication of some of the primary food chain which in turn could have major consequences for predator or consumer species. even if the chemical effect on lower life forms is small the lower pyramid levels of the food chain may ingest alien chemicals which normally become more concentrated for each consuming rung of the food chain. many of these effects are now well known such as the concentration of persistent ddt materials for avian consumers leading to weakening of egg shells increased chick mortality and potential extinction of species. effects occur to agricultural lands which have certain types of soil contamination. contaminants typically alter plant metabolism often causing a reduction in crop yields. this has a secondary effect upon soil conservation since the languishing crops can not shield the earths soil from erosion. some of these chemical contaminants have long half lives and in other cases derivative chemicals are formed from decay of primary soil contaminants. cleanup or environmental remediation is analyzed by environmental scientists who utilize field measurement of soil chemicals and also apply computer models for analyzing transport and fate of soil chemicals. various technologies have been developed for remediation of oil contaminated soil and sediments there are several principal strategies for remediation various national standards for concentrations of particular contaminants include the united states epa region preliminary remediation goals the u. s. epa region risk based concentrations and national environment protection council of australia guideline on investigation levels in soil and groundwater. the immense and sustained growth of the peoples republic of china since the s has exacted a price from the land in increased soil pollution. the ministry of ecology and environment believes it to be a threat to the environment to food safety and to sustainable agriculture. according to a scientific sampling million mu of chinas cultivated land have been polluted with contaminated water being used to irrigate a further. million mu and another million mu covered or destroyed by solid waste. in total the area accounts for one tenth of chinas cultivatable land and is mostly in economically developed areas. an estimated million tonnes of grain are contaminated by heavy metals every year causing direct losses of billion yuan. according to the received data from member states in the european union the number of estimated potential contaminated sites is more than. million and the identified contaminated sites around thousand. municipal and industrial wastes contribute most to soil contamination followed by the industrial commercial sector. mineral oil and heavy metals are the main contaminants contributing around to soil contamination. in terms of budget the management of contaminated sites is estimated to cost around billion euros annually. generic guidance commonly used in the united kingdom are the soil guideline values published by the department for environment food and rural affairs and the environment agency. these are screening values that demonstrate the minimal acceptable level of a substance. above this there can be no assurances in terms of significant risk of harm to human health. these have been derived using the contaminated land exposure assessment model. certain input parameters such as health criteria values age and land use are fed into clea uk to obtain a probabilistic output. guidance by the inter departmental committee for the redevelopment of contaminated land has been formally withdrawn by defra for use as a prescriptive document to determine the potential need for remediation or further assessment. the clea model published by defra and the environment agency in march sets a framework for the appropriate assessment of risks to human health from contaminated land as required by part iia of the environmental protection act. as part of this framework generic soil guideline values have currently been derived for ten contaminants to be used as intervention values. these values should not be considered as remedial targets but values above which further detailed assessment should be considered see dutch standards. three sets of clea sgvs have been produced for three different land uses namely it is intended that the sgvs replace the former icrcl values. the clea sgvs relate to assessing chronic risks to human health and do not apply to the protection of ground workers during construction or other potential receptors such as groundwater buildings plants or other ecosystems. the clea sgvs are not directly applicable to a site completely covered in hardstanding as there is no direct exposure route to contaminated soils. to date the first ten of fifty five contaminant sgvs have been published for the following arsenic cadmium chromium lead inorganic mercury nickel selenium ethyl benzene phenol and toluene. draft sgvs for benzene naphthalene and xylene have been produced but their publication is on hold. toxicological data has been published for each of these contaminants as well as for benzopyrene benzene dioxins furans and dioxin like pcbs naphthalene vinyl chloride tetrachloroethane and tetrachloroethane trichloroethane tetrachloroethene carbon tetrachloride dichloroethane trichloroethene and xylene. the sgvs for ethyl benzene phenol and toluene are dependent on the soil organic matter content content. as an initial screen the sgvs for som are considered to be appropriate. as of february there are a total of plus contaminated sites in canada. one infamous contaminated sited is located near a nickel copper smelting site in sudbury ontario. a study investigating the heavy metal pollution in the vicinity of the smelter reveals that elevated levels of nickel and copper were found in the soil values going as high as ppm ni and ppm cu within a. km range of the smelter location. other metals were also found in the soil such metals include iron cobalt and silver. furthermore upon examining the different vegetation surrounding the smelter it was evident that they too had been affected the results show that the plants contained nickel copper and aluminium as a result of soil contamination. in march the issue of uranium poisoning in punjab attracted press coverage. it was alleged to be caused by fly ash ponds of thermal power stations which reportedly lead to severe birth defects in children in the faridkot and bhatinda districts of punjab. the news reports claimed the uranium levels were more than times the maximum safe limit. in the government of india confirmed that the ground water in malwa belt of punjab has uranium metal that is above the trace limits set by the united nations world health organization. scientific studies based on over samples from various sampling points could not trace the source to fly ash and any sources from thermal power plants or industry as originally alleged. the study also revealed that the uranium concentration in ground water of malwa district is not times the who limits but only above the who limit in locations. this highest concentration found in samples was less than those found naturally in ground waters currently used for human purposes elsewhere such as finland. research is underway to identify natural or other sources for the uranium. plastic waste is choking our planet polluting the air water and soil both people and wildlife need to survive. and as this crisis spreads to every corner of the globe wwf is leading the charge to help reimagine how we source design dispose of and reuse the plastic materials communities most depend upon. because while plastic can help make our hospitals safer our food last longer and our packages more efficient to ship it has no place in nature. every day plastic is flowing into our natural environment at an unprecedented rate a dump truck every minute into our oceans alone. it s time to turn off the tap. together. wwf is uniting our global networks of industry leaders consumers and policymakers to transform our systems so the plastics we discard become plastics we use again. as everyday people continue doing their part to reduce reuse and recycle wwf is engaging policymakers to ensure the plastics leaving recycling bins stay in effective waste management systems and out of the hands of illegal plastic traffickers. through our resource plastic activation hub we re helping some of the world s leading companies translate ambitious plastic commitments into measurable change both across their business operations and well beyond their supply chains. we re working on the ground with local partners from indonesia to peru to keep plastic out of our planet s most extraordinary ecosystems. and in oceans the world over we re supporting communities and fishing crews big and small to improve gear use and recovery so issues like abandoned nets no longer pose one of the biggest threats to marine life. wwf is fighting for a world with no plastic in nature by. it s a world where our oceans teem with marine life not discarded nets bottles and bags. where no human breathes the toxic fumes of burning plastic. and where every indispensable plastic product is used to make another. it s a world where people and nature thrive together. join us. an exorbitant amount of plastic waste continues to plague our oceans threatening marine life and the people who depend on these waters for their livelihoods. despite the dire scope of this crisis the growing momentum to address it is promising. as we work towards a solution for the plastic waste crisis we must do it in a way that does not negatively impact other critical issues that are affecting the environment including the climate forests and food waste. for example when companies substitute paper products for plastics we must ensure that the paper comes from responsibly managed forests particularly those certified by the forest stewardship council. otherwise we re just shifting the environmental cost to another part of nature. wwf s living planet report found that global biodiversity declined by between and. over species are negatively impacted by plastic waste but we re only just starting to understand the effects of plastics on our ecosystems. plastic pollution has far reaching implications for local communities by posing a public health risk decreasing fish stock and contributing to climate change. communities in developing countries are particularly vulnerable to the effects of plastic pollution. in areas with poor infrastructure polluted coastlines where plastic accumulates can create a favorable breeding environment for disease carrying organisms such as insects and rodents. and plastic production represents up to of global petrol use on par with the aviation industry and incinerating plastic waste pollutes our air all while contributing to climate change. only of plastic waste in the us is recycled each year. when plastic ends up in nature this waste affects the fishery maritime and tourism industries causing an estimated billion in economic losses annually. our current waste management system and recycling infrastructure can not properly manage the volume of virgin plastic constantly entering the system. when we throw out plastic instead of recapturing and recycling it we miss an important opportunity to recapture the value of the resources already used for the production of our plastics. there is more than billion worth of plastic material sitting in the united states landfills at this very moment. wwf is advocating for a holistic solution that curbs plastic pollution and its many associated consequences. each one of us is part of the solutions needed for a plastic revolution. wwf works to raise awareness about ways we can address plastic waste in our daily lives through the choices we make about our consumption and habits. whether it s skipping some single use plastic packing or carrying a reusable water bottle we educate our wwf members and activists about the impact they can make to help end plastic pollution. wwf s campaign no plastic in nature aims to fix a broken system using a holistic approach. there is no single solution to plastic pollution we need a combination of strategies and engagement from all actors. by engaging all actors government businesses and the public we can examine every aspect of the life cycle of any given plastic material and identify key elements that are ripe for intervention. while our aim is to eliminate the leakage of plastic into nature by we have also set a goal for establishing a global legally binding agreement to end plastic pollution. such an agreement would introduce specific targets and pave the way for each nation to devise an action plan for addressing the plastic pollution epidemic. wwf is committed to engaging with the united states government and securing our elected officials support on this paris for plastics. companies are uniquely positioned to help drive large scale transformative change by improving their own plastic pollution footprint as well as influencing other key stakeholders like governments and consumers to do the same. through wwf s activation hub resource plastic we seek to redesign how businesses source use and dispose of plastics. to learn more about resource plastic please visit resource plastic. com. in coordination with several global consumer brand companies wwf has also established the bioplastic feedstock alliance a science driven organization which aims to evaluate diverse bioplastic feedstocks to better understand the potential sustainability opportunities of each. the bfa helps the bioplastic industry s emerging supply chain move in a positive direction. a major threat to marine biodiversity abandoned fishing gear or ghost gear is estimated to comprise up to of plastic waste in our oceans by volume. while this may seem like a small number ghost gear is the most harmful form of plastic pollution to marine species. ghost gear continues to capture wildlife well after it s abandoned pollute habitats and enters the food web as it degrades. ghost gear impacts of all marine mammals on the red list of threatened species. fishing feeds billions of people and is vital to the economies of countless coastal communities. but unsustainable practices litter the ocean with deadly traps that needlessly kill marine mammals turtles and seabirds. abandoned lost or discarded fishing gear commonly referred to as ghost gear contribute significantly to the problem of plastic pollution in our ocean. these gillnets traps and other types of fishing gear are particularly harmful because they can continue to catch target and non target species indiscriminately for years. this impacts important food resources as well as endangered species. because of this ghost gear has been coined as the most deadly form of marine plastic debris damaging vital ocean habitats aquatic life and livelihoods. eight million metric tons of plastic are leaking into our oceans every year. ask our government leaders to help stop plastics from leaking into our oceans. donate to support wwfs conservation efforts and say no to plastic by using wwf s reusable strawworld wildlife fund street n. w. washington dc world wildlife fund inc. is a nonprofit tax exempt charitable organization under section of the internal revenue code. donations are tax deductible as allowed by law. world wildlife fund. wwf and panda symbol are owned by wwf. all rights reserved. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. copyright national geographic societycopyright national geographic partners llc. all rights reserved air pollution is the release of pollutants such as gases particles biological molecules etc. into the air that is harmful to human health and the environment. air pollution refers to any physical chemical or biological change in the air. it is the contamination of air by harmful gases dust and smoke which affects plants animals and humans drastically. there is a certain percentage of gases present in the atmosphere. an increase or decrease in the composition of these gases is harmful to survival. this imbalance in the gaseous composition has resulted in an increase in earth s temperature which is known as global warming. there are two types of air pollutants the pollutants that directly cause air pollution are known as primary pollutants. sulphur dioxide emitted from factories is a primary pollutant. the pollutants formed by the intermingling and reaction of primary pollutants are known as secondary pollutants. smog formed by the intermingling of smoke and fog is a secondary pollutant. also read water pollutionfollowing are the important causes of air pollution the combustion of fossil fuels emits a large amount of sulphur dioxide. carbon monoxide released by incomplete combustion of fossil fuels also results in air pollution. the gases emitted from vehicles such as jeeps trucks cars buses etc. pollute the environment. these are the major sources of greenhouse gases and also result in diseases among individuals. ammonia is one of the most hazardous gases emitted during agricultural activities. the insecticides pesticides and fertilizers emit harmful chemicals in the atmosphere and contaminate it. factories and industries are the main source of carbon monoxide organic compounds hydrocarbons and chemicals. these are released into the air degrading its quality. in the mining process the minerals below the earth are extracted using large pieces of equipment. the dust and chemicals released during the process not only pollute the air but also deteriorate the health of the workers and people living in the nearby areas. the household cleaning products and paints contain toxic chemicals that are released in the air. the smell from the newly painted walls is the smell of the chemicals present in the paints. it not only pollutes the air but also affects breathing. also read ozone layer depletionthe hazardous effects of air pollution on the environment include air pollution has resulted in several respiratory disorders and heart diseases among humans. the cases of lung cancer have increased in the last few decades. children living near polluted areas are more prone to pneumonia and asthma. many people die every year due to the direct or indirect effects of air pollution. due to the emission of greenhouse gases there is an imbalance in the gaseous composition of the air. this has led to an increase in the temperature of the earth. this increase in earth s temperature is known as global warming. this has resulted in the melting of glaciers and an increase in sea levels. many areas are submerged underwater. the burning of fossil fuels releases harmful gases such as nitrogen oxides and sulphur oxides in the air. the water droplets combine with these pollutants become acidic and fall as acid rain which damages human animal and plant life. the release of chlorofluorocarbons halons and hydro chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere is the major cause of depletion of the ozone layer. the depleting ozone layer does not prevent the harmful ultraviolet rays coming from the sun and causes skin diseases and eye problems among individuals. the air pollutants suspend on the water bodies and affect the aquatic life. pollution also compels the animals to leave their habitat and shift to a new place. this renders them stray and has also led to the extinction of a large number of animal species. following are the measures one should adopt to control air pollution people should avoid using vehicles for shorter distances. rather they should prefer public modes of transport to travel from one place to another. this not only prevents pollution but also conserves energy. a large number of fossil fuels are burnt to generate electricity. therefore do not forget to switch off the electrical appliances when not in use. thus you can save the environment at the individual level. use of energy efficient devices such cfls also controls pollution to a greater level. the use of solar wind and geothermal energies reduce air pollution at a larger level. various countries including india have implemented the use of these resources as a step towards a cleaner environment. other air pollution control measures include also read environmental issuesto know more about what is air pollution its definition causes effects types of pollutants and air pollution control measures keep visiting byju s website or download the byju s app for further reference. put your understanding of this concept to test by answering a few mcqs. click start quiz to begin select the correct answer and click on the finish buttoncheck your score and answers at the end of the quizcongrats visit byju s for all biology related queries and study materialsyour result is as belowvery well explained. i could not find so amazing information on air pollution for school hw. epic stuff thank u for this this was very helpfull for me yes everyone has not aware about pollution and but we do effort for reduce pollution make our earth future brightright brothank you byjus for such an easy lesson relevant answers and easy to learn and understandbyjus helps me alotthanksat the time of lockdown the environment has improved but when the lockdown will end the pollution rate would increaseotherwise nicely explainedkeep it upthanx for all these info. a very informative pagethere is nothing more than living in a world full of polluted gas and we leave bad environment for our future generation. lets keep the word a beautiful place to live for everyone. very useful used it for my daughter s oralit is very usefuli understood everythingnice presentation and explanation and it s very useful for better understandingthank you so much this content was really very informative helpful and too useful for me. thanks to byjus thank you soo much for this info. it was really helpful for my projectthank you byjusthank you sooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo much this helped me in my projectthank you byju s. this helped in my preasentationit helped me a lot with my project thank you so much byjus it s very good for studentswell explained your mobile number and email id will not be published. required fields are marked request otp onvoice callwebsite post comment bookfree classbookfree classjump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. british poet w. h. auden once noted thousands have lived without love not one without water. yet while we all know water is crucial for life we trash it anyway. some percent of the world s wastewater is dumpedlargely untreatedback into the environment polluting rivers lakes and oceans. this widespread problem of water pollution is jeopardizing our health. unsafe water kills more people each year than war and all other forms of violence combined. meanwhile our drinkable water sources are finite less than percent of the earth s freshwater is actually accessible to us. without action the challenges will only increase by when global demand for freshwater is expected to be one third greater than it is now. sip a glass of cool clear water as you read this and you may think water pollution is a problem... somewhere else. but while most americans have access to safe drinking water potentially harmful contaminantsfrom arsenic to copper to leadhave been found in the tap water of every single state in the nation. still we re not hopeless against the threat to clean water. to better understand the problem and what we can do about it here s an overview of what water pollution is what causes it and how we can protect ourselves. water pollution occurs when harmful substancesoften chemicals or microorganismscontaminate a stream river lake ocean aquifer or other body of water degrading water quality and rendering it toxic to humans or the environment. water is uniquely vulnerable to pollution. known as a universal solvent water is able to dissolve more substances than any other liquid on earth. it s the reason we have kool aid and brilliant blue waterfalls. it s also why water is so easily polluted. toxic substances from farms towns and factories readily dissolve into and mix with it causing water pollution. when rain falls and seeps deep into the earth filling the cracks crevices and porous spaces of an aquifer it becomes groundwaterone of our least visible but most important natural resources. nearly percent of americans rely on groundwater pumped to the earth s surface for drinking water. for some folks in rural areas it s their only freshwater source. groundwater gets polluted when contaminantsfrom pesticides and fertilizers to waste leached from landfills and septic systemsmake their way into an aquifer rendering it unsafe for human use. ridding groundwater of contaminants can be difficult to impossible as well as costly. once polluted an aquifer may be unusable for decades or even thousands of years. groundwater can also spread contamination far from the original polluting source as it seeps into streams lakes and oceans. covering about percent of the earth surface water is what fills our oceans lakes rivers and all those other blue bits on the world map. surface water from freshwater sources accounts for more than percent of the water delivered to american homes. but a significant pool of that water is in peril. according to the most recent surveys on national water quality from the u. s. environmental protection agency nearly half of our rivers and streams and more than one third of our lakes are polluted and unfit for swimming fishing and drinking. nutrient pollution which includes nitrates and phosphates is the leading type of contamination in these freshwater sources. while plants and animals need these nutrients to grow they have become a major pollutant due to farm waste and fertilizer runoff. municipal and industrial waste discharges contribute their fair share of toxins as well. there s also all the random junk that industry and individuals dump directly into waterways. eighty percent of ocean pollution originates on landwhether along the coast or far inland. contaminants such as chemicals nutrients and heavy metals are carried from farms factories and cities by streams and rivers into our bays and estuaries from there they travel out to sea. meanwhile marine debrisparticularly plasticis blown in by the wind or washed in via storm drains and sewers. our seas are also sometimes spoiled by oil spills and leaksbig and smalland are consistently soaking up carbon pollution from the air. the ocean absorbs as much as a quarter of man made carbon emissions. when contamination originates from a single source it s called point source pollution. examples include wastewater discharged legally or illegally by a manufacturer oil refinery or wastewater treatment facility as well as contamination from leaking septic systems chemical and oil spills and illegal dumping. the epa regulates point source pollution by establishing limits on what can be discharged by a facility directly into a body of water. while point source pollution originates from a specific place it can affect miles of waterways and ocean. nonpoint source pollution is contamination derived from diffuse sources. these may include agricultural or stormwater runoff or debris blown into waterways from land. nonpoint source pollution is the leading cause of water pollution in u. s. waters but it s difficult to regulate since there s no single identifiable culprit. it goes without saying that water pollution can t be contained by a line on a map. transboundary pollution is the result of contaminated water from one country spilling into the waters of another. contamination can result from a disasterlike an oil spillor the slow downriver creep of industrial agricultural or municipal discharge. aurora photos alamynot only is the agricultural sector the biggest consumer of global freshwater resources with farming and livestock production using about percent of the earth s surface water supplies but it s also a serious water polluter. around the world agriculture is the leading cause of water degradation. in the united states agricultural pollution is the top source of contamination in rivers and streams the second biggest source in wetlands and the third main source in lakes. it s also a major contributor of contamination to estuaries and groundwater. every time it rains fertilizers pesticides and animal waste from farms and livestock operations wash nutrients and pathogenssuch bacteria and virusesinto our waterways. nutrient pollution caused by excess nitrogen and phosphorus in water or air is the number one threat to water quality worldwide and can cause algal blooms a toxic soup of blue green algae that can be harmful to people and wildlife. used water is wastewater. it comes from our sinks showers and toilets and from commercial industrial and agricultural activities. the term also includes stormwater runoff which occurs when rainfall carries road salts oil grease chemicals and debris from impermeable surfaces into our waterwaysmore than percent of the world s wastewater flows back into the environment without being treated or reused according to the united nations in some least developed countries the figure tops percent. in the united states wastewater treatment facilities process about billion gallons of wastewater per day. these facilities reduce the amount of pollutants such as pathogens phosphorus and nitrogen in sewage as well as heavy metals and toxic chemicals in industrial waste before discharging the treated waters back into waterways. that s when all goes well. but according to epa estimates our nation s aging and easily overwhelmed sewage treatment systems also release more than billion gallons of untreated wastewater each year. big spills may dominate headlines but consumers account for the vast majority of oil pollution in our seas including oil and gasoline that drips from millions of cars and trucks every day. moreover nearly half of the estimated million tons of oil that makes its way into marine environments each year comes not from tanker spills but from land based sources such as factories farms and cities. at sea tanker spills account for about percent of the oil in waters around the world while regular operations of the shipping industrythrough both legal and illegal dischargescontribute about one third. oil is also naturally released from under the ocean floor through fractures known as seeps. radioactive waste is any pollution that emits radiation beyond what is naturally released by the environment. it s generated by uranium mining nuclear power plants and the production and testing of military weapons as well as by universities and hospitals that use radioactive materials for research and medicine. radioactive waste can persist in the environment for thousands of years making disposal a major challenge. consider the decommissioned hanford nuclear weapons production site in washington where the cleanup of million gallons of radioactive waste is expected to cost more than billion and last through. accidentally released or improperly disposed of contaminants threaten groundwater surface water and marine resources. to put it bluntly water pollution kills. in fact it caused. million deaths in according to a study published in the lancet. contaminated water can also make you ill. every year unsafe water sickens about billion people. and low income communities are disproportionately at risk because their homes are often closest to the most polluting industries. waterborne pathogens in the form of disease causing bacteria and viruses from human and animal waste are a major cause of illness from contaminated drinking water. diseases spread by unsafe water include cholera giardia and typhoid. even in wealthy nations accidental or illegal releases from sewage treatment facilities as well as runoff from farms and urban areas contribute harmful pathogens to waterways. thousands of people across the united states are sickened every year by legionnaires disease with cases cropping up from california s disneyland to manhattan s upper east side. todd mcinturf the detroit news apmeanwhile the plight of residents in flint michiganwhere cost cutting measures and aging water infrastructure created the recent lead contamination crisisoffers a stark look at how dangerous chemical and other industrial pollutants in our water can be. the problem goes far beyond flint and involves much more than lead as a wide range of chemical pollutantsfrom heavy metals such as arsenic and mercury to pesticides and nitrate fertilizersare getting into our water supplies. once they re ingested these toxins can cause a host of health issues from cancer to hormone disruption to altered brain function. children and pregnant women are particularly at risk. even swimming can pose a risk. every year. million americans contract health issues such as skin rashes pinkeye respiratory infections and hepatitis from sewage laden coastal waters according to epa estimates. in order to thrive healthy ecosystems rely on a complex web of animals plants bacteria and fungiall of which interact directly or indirectly with each other. harm to any of these organisms can create a chain effect imperiling entire aquatic environments. when water pollution causes an algal bloom in a lake or marine environment the proliferation of newly introduced nutrients stimulates plant and algae growth which in turn reduces oxygen levels in the water. this dearth of oxygen known as eutrophication suffocates plants and animals and can create dead zones where waters are essentially devoid of life. in certain cases these harmful algal blooms can also produce neurotoxins that affect wildlife from whales to sea turtles. chemicals and heavy metals from industrial and municipal wastewater contaminate waterways as well. these contaminants are toxic to aquatic lifemost often reducing an organism s life span and ability to reproduceand make their way up the food chain as predator eats prey. that s how tuna and other big fish accumulate high quantities of toxins such as mercury. marine ecosystems are also threatened by marine debris which can strangle suffocate and starve animals. much of this solid debris such as plastic bags and soda cans gets swept into sewers and storm drains and eventually out to sea turning our oceans into trash soup and sometimes consolidating to form floating garbage patches. discarded fishing gear and other types of debris are responsible for harming more than different species of marine life. meanwhile ocean acidification is making it tougher for shellfish and coral to survive. though they absorb about a quarter of the carbon pollution created each year by burning fossil fuels oceans are becoming more acidic. this process makes it harder for shellfish and other species to build shells and may impact the nervous systems of sharks clownfish and other marine life. it s easy to tsk tsk the oil company with a leaking tanker but we re all accountable to some degree for today s water pollution problem. fortunately there are some simple ways you can prevent water contamination or at least limit your contribution to it one of the most effective ways to stand up for our waters is to speak out in support of the clean water rule which clarifies the clean water act s scope and protects the drinking water of one in three americans. tell the federal government the u. s. army corps of engineers and your local elected officials that you support the clean water rule. also learn how you and those around you can get involved in the policymaking process. our public waterways serve every american. we should all have a say in how they re protected. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. the mighty bivalves are both and this former schoolteacher and bartender seeks to inspire a new generation of aquaculturists while putting north carolina oysters on the map. the humble bivalves which concentrate everything from heavy metals to cancer drugs in their tissues provide an ideal way for scientists to monitor nearshore water health. the rollback jeopardizes the streams that flow into the state s rivers lakes and bays millions of acres of wetlands across the country and the drinking water supply. litter sewage plastic and other pollutants do more than just ruin the beauty of the beach. they are closing down coastal areas destroying marine life and making people seriously sick. federal rollbacks could leave new mexico s limited water dirtier by excluding up to percent of the state s waterways from protection. the pfas laden firefighting foam used in training exercises at military bases easily slips into groundwater supplies tainting everything around it. with their latest rollback the president and the epa chief show that they either don t understand how water pollution worksor simply don t care. as droughts parch the southeast interstate squabbles heat up over the tennessee river. seth siegel author of the new book troubled water what s wrong with what we drink says we must change people s mind sets and get to the root of the issue to ensure safe drinking water for everyone. ugly foul smelling and sometimes toxic algal blooms are becoming more common in freshwater ecosystems like rivers lakes ponds and reservoirs. here s a look at how excess algae can impact the environmentand human health. in a move that could open the door to industrial waste and interstate squabbles the ohio river valley water sanitation commission is making its water quality standards voluntary. president trump revokes the clean water rule and doubles down on his fake weather forecast while the bureau of land management hitches up its wagons to move west. the fate of southern arizona s embattled san pedro river could hinge on whether the government acts to protect the nearly extinct arizona eryngoand in doing so puts the brakes on groundwater pumping that s draining the landscape. from fertilizer runoff to methane emissions large scale industrial agriculture pollution takes a toll on the environment. the administration relocates science jobs refuses to fill others and tosses a lifeline to polluters. otherwise it was just an ordinary week of secret meetings and betrayals of the public interest. a growing number of communitiesboth coastal and inlandare finding themselves underwater. extreme weather sea level rise and other climate change impacts are increasingly to blame. here s a look at what links flooding and our warming world. more than craft breweries from across the country including brooklyn brewery and new belgium brewing company are joining nrdc to explain why clean water is essential for great tasting beer. by relying on plants soil and natural systems to manage rainfall runoff green infrastructure tackles urban water woes and boosts climate resilience. here s how. after an illegal dumping of close to tons of dangerous sludge and contaminated materials across the street from two schools a kentucky community struggles with what to do next. ten years after the disaster at a tennessee power plant the cleanup crew is seeking justice. at the same time the trump administration is weakening protections for this toxic pollution. as the trump administration ratchets up its rhetoric demanding billions for a wall american communities along the mexico border are in need of basic services like reliable sewage treatment. after officials repeatedly dismissed claims that flint s water was making people sick residents took action. here s how the lead contamination crisis unfoldedand what we can learn from it. the problem of how to dispose of nuclear waste has haunted the united states for six decades. it s now landed on new mexico s doorstep. lizzie carr is shining a light on what is floating through the world s waterways and breaking athletic records along the way. residents of cities like pittsburgh and newark continue to face high levels of this toxic metal in their drinking water supplies. here s what to do if this crisis affects you. here s why this environmental and public health win is so important. the trump administration wants to open our waterways back up to pollution. for years the state has ignored its foamy rivers and water supplies contaminated with chemicals called pfass. the big apple s combined sewer system is years oldand in desperate need of improvement. vague regulations let government officials hide drinking water contamination from the public. toxic algal blooms are suffocating waterways from the gulf of mexico to lake erie. for drinking water flood control climate defense habitat protection fishing swimming and of course craft beer. quick and easy things you can do to reduce water pollution and runoff. the cruel and un american folly of shutting down the epa s environmental justice program. lots of people think drinking bottled water is safer. is it thanks to the mississippi river s trash stream the gulf has some of the highest concentrations of plastic in the world. plus wheeler ignores factory farm pollution zinke ignores damage to wetlands and trump ignores public opposition to drilling the arctic refuge. when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosureswe use cookies to analyse how visitors use our website and to help us provide the best possible experience for users. view our cookie policy. tweet wwf ral garcavisit the wwf teachers sectionmore information on oceansriverslakeswetlandsfreshwateragricultureworking to sustain the natural world for the benefit of people and nature wwf world wide fund for nature panda symbol wwf world wide fund for nature wwf is a wwf registered trademark creative commons license. water pollution is defined as the presence in groundwater of toxic chemicals and biological agents that exceed what is naturally found in the water and may pose a threat to human health and or the environment. additionally water pollution may consist of chemicals introduced into the water bodies as a result of various human activities. any amount of those chemicals pollutes the water regardless of the harm they may pose to human health and the environment. many of the chlorinated solvents commonly used in industry are examples of such chemicals polluting our waters exclusively due to human activities. another example is mtbe a gasoline oxygenate that is currently banned in the u. s. regardless of their provenance the chemicals or biological agents causing water pollution are generically referred to as water pollutants. the chemical and biological agents represent the main causes of water pollution and are generically referred to as water pollutants. any kind of water can become polluted regardless of its size or location. this includes lakes from remote areas or huge water bodies and is due to the air transportation of pollutant particles and their transfer into precipitation water. the groundwater and surface water consist of swimming pools ponds lakes creeks rivers seas and oceans that may all become polluted at some point. due to the quick diffusion and dissipation of contamination and the faster natural degradation processes the bigger the water body is the shorter the time required for naturally cleansing the pollution and recovery. there are various types of water pollution based on the various causes of water pollution. various classifications can be made based on various water pollution causes. the type of the water pollutants based on this classification criteria water pollution can be i chemical when various chemicals are the water pollution causes. the following chemicals are the most common water pollutants ii radiological when radioactive materials are the water pollutant causes. iii biological when various microorganisms worms and or algae occurring in a large number are the water pollution causes. this type of pollution is caused by decaying organic material in water animal wastes as well as improper disposal of human wastes.. the type of the source of water pollutants these are localized sources like an industrial process a mining activity etc. these sources are usually regulated so that the effect may be predicted and the impact minimized. however accidental leaks and spills are an exception to that. these are unidentified sources from which pollutants are carried away by water discharges and runoffs. non point pollution may involve a broad range of pollutants but in lower amounts than the point sources. the main sources of pollution are all resulted from the disposal of chemical substances coming from medical industrial and household waste chaotic agricultural fertilizers disposal and accidental oil spills that pollute the water to a large extent. examples of major water pollutants that affect the health of humans are examples of major water pollutants that affect the ecosystem only are the following water pollution may cause a large variety of diseases and poses a serious problem for human health. this is mainly because we may get exposed to polluted water in various ways including but not necessarily limited to the effects of water pollution may appear immediately after exposure and be more or less violent in the case of drinking water with a high amount of pollutants. on the other hand the effects may appear some time after repetitive exposure to water contaminated with lower amounts of pollutants. the health effects of drinking contaminated water may range from simple intoxication and stomach aches to deadly diseases or sudden death. february read by usersaugust read by usersfebruary read by userscopyright www. environmentalpollutioncenters. org all rights reserved. disclaimer terms of use privacy policy sitemapcopyright national geographic societycopyright national geographic partners llc. all rights reservedthe requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. by chris woodford. last updated june. over two thirds of earths surface is covered by water less than a third is taken up by land. as earths population continues to grow people are putting ever increasing pressure on the planets waterresources. in a sense our oceans rivers and other inland waters arebeing squeezed by human activitiesnot so they take up less room butso their quality is reduced. poorer water quality means water pollution. we know that pollution is a human problem because it is arelatively recent development in the planets history before the century industrial revolution people lived more in harmony with theirimmediate environment. as industrialization has spread around theglobe so the problem of pollution has spread with it. when earthspopulation was much smaller no one believed pollution would everpresent a serious problem. it was once popularly believed thatthe oceans were far too big to pollute. today with around billionpeople on the planet it has become apparent that there are limits. pollution is one of the signs that humans have exceeded those limits. how serious is the problem according to the environmental campaign organizationwwf pollution from toxic chemicals threatens life on this planet. every ocean and every continent from the tropics to the once pristine polar regions is contaminated. photo detergent pollution entering a river. photo courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. water pollution can be defined in many ways. usually it means oneor more substances have built up in water to such an extent that theycause problems for animals or people. oceans lakes rivers and otherinland waters can naturally clean up a certain amount of pollution bydispersing it harmlessly. if you poured a cup of black ink into ariver the ink would quickly disappear into the rivers much larger volume of clean water. the inkwould still be there in the river but in such a low concentration thatyou would not be able to see it. at such low levels the chemicals in the ink probably would not present any real problem. however if you poured gallons of ink into a river every few seconds through a pipe the river would quickly turn black. the chemicals in the ink could very quickly have an effect on the quality of the water. this in turn could affect the health of all the plants animals and humans whoselives depend on the river. photo pollution means adding substances to the environment that dont belong therelike theair pollution from this smokestack. pollution is not always as obvious as this however. thus water pollution is all about quantities how much of apolluting substance is released and how big a volume of water it isreleased into. a small quantity of a toxic chemical may have littleimpact if it is spilled into the ocean from a ship. but the same amountof the same chemical can have a much bigger impact pumped into a lakeor river where there is less clean water to disperse it. water pollution almost always means that some damage has been done to an ocean river lake or other water source. a united nations report defined ocean pollution as fortunately earth is forgiving and damage from water pollution is often reversible. when we think of earths water resources we think of hugeoceans lakes and rivers. water resources like these are called surfacewaters. the most obvious type of water pollution affects surfacewaters. for example a spill from an oil tanker creates an oil slickthat can affect a vast area of the ocean. not all of earths water sits on its surface however. a great dealof water is held in underground rock structures known as aquifers which we can not see and seldom think about. water stored underground in aquifers is known as groundwater. aquifers feed our rivers and supply much of our drinking water. theytoo can become polluted for example when weed killers used inpeoples gardens drain into the ground. groundwater pollution is muchless obvious than surface water pollution but is no less of a problem. in a study in iowa in the united states found that over half thestates groundwater wells were contaminated with weed killers. you might think things would have improved since then but two decades on all thats really changed is the name of the chemicalswere using. today numerous scientific studies are still finding weed killers in groundwater in worrying quantities a study discovered glyphosate in percent of groundwater samples from catalonia spain scientific opinion differs on whether this is safe or not. surface waters and groundwater are the two types of water resourcesthat pollution affects. there are also two different ways in whichpollution can occur. if pollution comes from a single location such asa discharge pipe attached to a factory it is known as point sourcepollution. other examples of point source pollution include an oilspill from a tanker a discharge from a smoke stack or someone pouring oil from their car down a drain. a great deal ofwater pollution happens not from one single source but from manydifferent scattered sources. this is called nonpoint sourcepollution. photo above point source pollution comes from a single well defined place such as this pipe. below nonpoint source pollution comes from many sources. all the industrial plants alongside a river and theships that service them may be polluting the river collectively. both photos courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. when point source pollution enters the environment the place mostaffected is usually the area immediately around the source. forexample when a tanker accident occurs the oil slick is concentratedaround the tanker itself and in the right ocean conditions thepollution disperses the further away from the tanker you go. this isless likely to happen with nonpoint source pollution which bydefinition enters the environment from many different places at once. sometimes pollution that enters the environment in one place has aneffect hundreds or even thousands of miles away. this is known as transboundarypollution. one example is the way radioactive waste travels throughthe oceans from nuclear reprocessing plants in england and france tonearby countries such as ireland and norway. some forms of water pollution are very obvious everyone has seen tvnews footage of oil slicks filmed from helicopters flying overhead. water pollution is usually less obvious and much harder to detect thanthis. but how can we measure water pollution when we can not see it howdo we even know its there there are two main ways of measuring the quality of water. one is totake samples of the water and measure the concentrations of differentchemicals that it contains. if the chemicals are dangerous or theconcentrations are too great we can regard the water as polluted. measurements like this are known as chemical indicators ofwater quality. another way to measure water quality involves examiningthe fish insects and other invertebrates that the water will support. if many different types of creatures can live in a river the quality is likely tobe very good if the river supports no fish life at all the quality isobviously much poorer. measurements like this are called biologicalindicators of water quality. most water pollution doesnt begin in the water itself. take the oceans around percent of ocean pollution enters our seas from the land. virtually any human activity can have an effect on the quality of ourwater environment. when farmers fertilize the fields the chemicalsthey use are gradually washed by rain into the groundwater or surfacewaters nearby. sometimes the causes of water pollution are quitesurprising. chemicals released by smokestacks can enter theatmosphere and then fall back to earth as rain entering seas rivers and lakes and causing water pollution. thats called atmospheric deposition. water pollution has many different causes and this is one of the reasons why it is such adifficult problem to solve. with billions of people on the planet disposing of sewage wasteis a major problem. according to figures from the world health organization some billion people dont have access to safe drinking wateror the most basic sanitation. billion lack safely managed sanitation. although there have been great improvements in securing access to clean water relatively little genuine progress has been made on improving global sanitation in the last decade. sewage disposal affects peoples immediate environments and leads towater related illnesses such as diarrhea that kills children under five each year. in developed countries most people have flush toilets that takesewage waste quickly and hygienically away from their homes. yet the problem of sewage disposal does not end there. when youflush the toilet the waste has to go somewhere and even after itleaves the sewage treatment works there is still waste to dispose of. sometimes sewage waste is pumped untreated into the sea. until the early s around million tons of sewage was dumpedby barge from new york city each year. according to figures from the uk governments department forthe environment food and rural affairs the sewers of britain collect around billion liters of waste water every day there are still sewage overflow pipes through which in certain circumstances such as heavy storms raw sewage is pumped untreated into the sea. the new river that crosses the border from mexicointo california once carried with it million gallons of raw sewage each day a new waste water plant on the us mexico border completed in substantiallysolved that problem. unfortunately even in some of the richest nations thepractice of dumping sewage into the sea continues. in early it was reported that the tiny island of guernsey has decided to continue dumping tons of raw sewageinto the sea each day. in theory sewage is a completely natural substance that should bebroken down harmlessly in the environment percent of sewage is water. in practice sewage contains all kinds of other chemicals from the pharmaceutical drugs people take tothe paper plastic and other wastes they flush down their toilets. when people are sick with viruses the sewage they produce carriesthose viruses into the environment. it is possible to catch illnessessuch as hepatitis typhoid and cholera from river and sea water. photo during crop spraying some chemicals will drain into the soil. eventually they seep intorivers and other watercourses. photo courtesy of us department of agriculture agricultural research service. suitably treated and used in moderate quantities sewage can be afertilizer it returns important nutrients to the environment such asnitrogen and phosphorus which plants and animals need for growth. thetrouble is sewage is often released in much greater quantities thanthe natural environment can cope with. chemical fertilizers used byfarmers also add nutrients to the soil which drain into rivers andseas and add to the fertilizing effect of the sewage. together sewageand fertilizers can cause a massive increase in the growth of algae orplankton that overwhelms huge areas of oceans lakes or rivers. thisis known as a harmful algal bloom. it is harmful because itremoves oxygen from the water that kills other forms of life leadingto what is known as a dead zone. the gulf of mexico has one ofthe worlds most spectacular dead zones. each summer accordingto studies by the noaa it typically grows to an area of around square miles which isabout the same size as the state of connecticut. a few statistics illustrate the scale of the problem that wastewater cancause. around half of all ocean pollution is caused by sewage and wastewater. each year the world generates perhaps billion tons of industrialwaste much of which is pumped untreated into rivers oceans and otherwaterways. in the united states alone around factories takeclean water from rivers and many pump polluted waters back in theirplace. however there have been major improvements in waste watertreatment recently. since in the united states the environmental protection agency has invested about billion in improving water treatment plants that as of serve around percent of the us population. however another billion is still needed to update and upgrade the system. factories are point sources of water pollution but quite a lot ofwater is polluted by ordinary people from nonpoint sources this is howordinary water becomes waste water in the first place. virtually everyone pours chemicals of one sort or another down theirdrains or toilets. even detergents used inwashing machines anddishwashers eventually end up in our rivers and oceans. so do thepesticides we use on our gardens. a lot of toxic pollution also enterswaste water from highway runoff. highways are typically coveredwith a cocktail of toxic chemicalseverything from spilled fuel andbrake fluids to bits of worn tires and exhaust emissions. when it rains these chemicals washinto drains and rivers. it is not unusual for heavy summer rainstormsto wash toxic chemicals into rivers in such concentrations that theykill large numbers of fish overnight. it has been estimated that inone year the highway runoff from a single large city leaks as much oilinto our water environment as a typical tanker spill. some highway runoff runs away into drains others can pollute groundwater or accumulate in the land next to a road making it increasingly toxic as the years go by. detergents are relatively mild substances. at the opposite end of thespectrum are highly toxic chemicals such as polychlorinatedbiphenyls. they were once widely used to manufactureelectronic circuit boards but their harmful effects have now been recognized and their use is highly restricted in many countries. nevertheless an estimated half million tons of pcbs were dischargedinto the environment during the century. in a classicexample of transboundary pollution traces of pcbs have even been foundin birds and fish in the arctic. they were carried there through theoceans thousands of miles from where they originally entered theenvironment. although pcbs are widely banned their effects will befelt for many decades because they last a long time in the environmentwithout breaking down. another kind of toxic pollution comes from heavy metals such aslead cadmium and mercury. lead was once commonly used in gasoline though its use is now restricted in some countries. mercuryand cadmium are still used in batteries. until recently a highlytoxic chemical called tributyltin was used in paints toprotect boats from the ravaging effects of the oceans. ironically however tbt was gradually recognized as a pollutant boats paintedwith it were doing as much damage to the oceans as the oceans weredoing to the boats. the best known example of heavy metal pollution in the oceans tookplace in when a japanese factory discharged a significant amountof mercury metal into minamata bay contaminating the fish stocksthere. it took a decade for the problem to come to light. by that time many local people had eaten the fish and around were poisoned. hundreds of people were left dead or disabled. people view radioactive waste with great alarmand for good reason. at high enough concentrations it can kill in lower concentrations itcan cause cancers and other illnesses. the biggest sources ofradioactive pollution in europe are two factories that reprocess wastefuel from nuclear power plants sellafield on the north west coast of britain and cap la hague on thenorth coast of france. both discharge radioactive waste water into thesea which ocean currents then carry around the world. countries suchas norway which lie downstream from britain receive significantdoses of radioactive pollution from sellafield. the norwegian government has repeatedly complained that sellafield hasincreased radiation levels along its coast by times. both the irish and norwegian governments continue to press forthe plants closure. photo oil tanker spills are the most spectacular forms of pollution and the ones that catch public attention but only a fraction of all water pollution happens this way. photo courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. when we think of ocean pollution huge black oil slicks often springto mind yet these spectacular accidents represent only a tiny fractionof all the pollution entering our oceans. even considering oil byitself tanker spills are not as significant as they might seem only percent of the oil that enters the oceans comes from tanker accidents over percent of oil pollution at sea comes from routine shipping and from theoil people pour down drains on land. however what makes tanker spillsso destructive is the sheer quantity of oil they release at once inother words the concentration of oil they produce in one verylocalized part of the marine environment. the biggest oil spill inrecent years occurred when the tanker exxon valdez broke up inprince william sound in alaska in. around million gallons of oil were released into the pristine wildernessenough to fill your living room times over estimates of the marine animals killed in the spillvary from approximately sea otters and birds to as many as sea otters and sea birds. several billion salmon and herring eggs are also believed to have been destroyed. if youve ever taken part in a community beach clean youll knowthat plastic is far and away the most common substance that washes upwith the waves. there are three reasons for this plastic is one ofthe most common materials used for making virtually every kind ofmanufactured object from clothing to automobile parts plasticis light and floats easily so it can travel enormous distances acrossthe oceans most plastics are not biodegradable which means that things likeplastic bottle tops can survive in the marine environment for a long time. while plastics are not toxic in quite the same way as poisonouschemicals they nevertheless present a major hazard to seabirds fish and other marine creatures. for example plastic fishing lines andother debris can strangle or choke fish. about half of allthe worlds seabird species are known to have eaten plastic residues. in one study of shearwaters in the north pacific over percent of the birds were found to contain plastic residues in their stomachs. in the early s marine scientist tim benton collecteddebris from a km length of beach in the remote pitcairn islandsin the south pacific. his study recorded approximately a thousandpieces of garbage including pieces of plastic plastic bottles and two dolls heads. today much media attention focuses on the great pacific garbage patch a floating oceanic graveyard of plastic junk roughly three times the size of france discovered by sailor charles j. moore in. but as youll know well enough if youve ever taken part in a community beachclean persistent plastic litters every ocean on the planet some million tons of new plastic are dumped in the sea every single year. most peoples idea of water pollution involves things like sewage toxic metals or oil slicks but pollution can be biological as well aschemical. in some parts of the world alien species are a majorproblem. alien species are animals or plants from one region that have been introduced into adifferent ecosystem where they do not belong. outside their normalenvironment they have no natural predators so they rapidly run wild crowding out the usual animals or plants that thrive there. commonexamples of alien species include zebra mussels in the great lakes ofthe usa which were carried there from europe by ballast water. the mediterranean sea has been invaded by akind of alien algaecalled caulerpa taxifolia. in the black sea an alien jellyfishcalled mnemiopsis leidyi reduced fish stocks by percent afterarriving in ballast water. in san francisco bay asian clams called potamocorbulaamurensis also introduced by ballast water have dramaticallyaltered the ecosystem. in cornell universitys david pimentel estimated that alien invaders like this cost the us economy billion a year in the european commission put the cost to europe at billion a year and growingall the time. photo invasive species above water hyacinth crowding out a waterway around an old fence post. photo by steve hillebrand. below non native zebra mussels clumped on a native mussel. both photos courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. these are the most common forms of pollutionbut by no means theonly ones. heat or thermal pollution from factories and powerplants also causes problems in rivers. by raising the temperature itreduces the amount of oxygen dissolved in the water thus also reducingthe level of aquatic life that the river can support. another type of pollution involves the disruption of sedimentsthat flow from rivers into the sea. dams built for hydroelectric poweror water reservoirs can reduce the sediment flow. this reduces the formation of beaches increases coastal erosion and reduces the flow ofnutrients from rivers into seas. increased sediments can also present a problem. during construction work soil rock and other fine powders sometimes enters nearby rivers in large quantities causing it to become turbid. the extra sediment can block the gills of fish effectively suffocating them. construction firms often now take precautions to prevent this kind of pollution from happening. some people believe pollution is an inescapable result of humanactivity they argue that if we want to have factories cities ships cars oil and coastal resorts some degree of pollution is almostcertain to result. in other words pollution is a necessary evil that peoplemust put up with if they want to make progress. fortunately noteveryone agrees with this view. one reason people have woken up to theproblem of pollution is that it brings costs of its own thatundermine any economic benefits that come about by polluting. take oil spills for example. they can happen if tankers are toopoorly built to survive accidents at sea. but the economic benefit ofcompromising on tanker quality brings an economic cost when an oilspill occurs. the oil can wash up on nearby beaches devastate the ecosystem and severely affect tourism. the main problem is that the people whobear the cost of the spill arenot the people who caused the problem in the first place. yet arguably everyone who puts gasoline into their caror uses almost any kind of petroleum fueledtransportcontributes to the problem in some way. so oil spills are aproblem for everyone not just people who live by the coast and tankeroperates. sewage is another good example of how pollution can affect us all. sewage discharged into coastal waters can wash up on beaches and causea health hazard. people who bathe or surf in the water can fall ill ifthey swallow polluted wateryet sewage can have other harmful effectstoo it can poison shellfish that grownear the shore. people who eat poisoned shellfish risk suffering froman acuteand sometimes fatalillness called paralytic shellfishpoisoning. shellfish is no longer caught along many shores becauseit is simply too polluted with sewage or toxic chemical wastes thathave discharged from the land nearby. pollution matters because it harms the environment on which peopledepend. the environment is not something distant and separate from ourlives. its not a pretty shoreline hundreds of miles from our homes ora wilderness landscape that we see only on tv. the environment iseverything that surrounds us that gives us life and health. destroyingthe environment ultimately reduces the quality of our own livesandthat most selfishly is why pollution should matter to all of us. there is no easy way to solve water pollution if there were itwouldnt be so much of a problem. broadly speaking there are threedifferent things that can help to tackle the problemeducation laws and economicsand they work together as a team. making people aware of the problem is the first step to solving it. in the early s when surfers in britain grew tired of catching illnessesfrom water polluted with sewage they formed a group called surfersagainst sewage to force governments and water companies to clean uptheir act. people whove grown tired of walking the worlds pollutedbeaches often band together to organize community beach cleaningsessions. anglers who no longer catch so many fish have campaigned fortougher penalties against factories that pour pollution into ourrivers. greater public awareness can make a positive difference. one of the biggest problems with water pollution is itstransboundary nature. many rivers cross countries while seas spanwhole continents. pollution discharged by factories in one country withpoor environmental standards can cause problems in neighboringnations even when they have tougher laws and higher standards. environmental laws can make it tougher for people to pollute but to bereally effective they have to operate across national and internationalborders. this is why we have international laws governing the oceans such as the un convention on the law of the sea the london convention the marpol international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships and the ospar convention for the protection of the marineenvironment of the north east atlantic. the european union haswater protection laws that apply to all of itsmember states. they include the bathing water directive which seeks to ensure the quality of the waters that people use forrecreation. most countries also have their own water pollution laws. inthe united states for example there is thelean water actand the safe drinking water act. most environmental experts agree that the best way to tacklepollution is through something called the polluter pays principle. this means that whoever causes pollution should have to pay to clean itup one way or another. polluter pays can operate in all kinds of ways. it could mean that tanker owners should have to take out insurance thatcovers the cost of oil spill cleanups for example. it could also meanthat shoppers should have to pay for their plastic grocery bags as isnow common in ireland to encourage recycling and minimize waste. or itcould mean that factories that use rivers must have their water inletpipes downstream of their effluent outflow pipes so if they causepollution they themselves are the first people to suffer. ultimately the polluter pays principle is designed to deter people from pollutingby making it less expensive for them to behave in an environmentallyresponsible way. life is ultimately about choicesand so is pollution. we can livewith sewage strewn beaches dead rivers and fish that are toopoisonous to eat. or we can work together to keep the environment cleanso the plants animals and people who depend on it remain healthy. wecan take individual action to help reduce water pollution for example by using environmentally friendly detergents not pouring oil downdrains reducing pesticides and so on. we can take community actiontoo by helping out on beach cleans or litter picks to keep our riversand seas that little bit cleaner. and we can take action as countriesand continents to pass laws that will make pollution harder and theworld less polluted. working together we can make pollution less of aproblemand the world a better place. wherever possible ive referenced my sources with links the following notes are mostly references to books journals and other offline reports that cant be linked the same way. please do not copy our articles onto blogs and other websitesarticles from this website are registered at the us copyright office. copying or otherwise using registered works without permission removing this or other copyright notices and or infringing related rights could make you liable to severe civil or criminal penalties. text copyright chris woodford. all rights reserved. full copyright notice and terms of use. this article was originally written for the uk rivers network and first published on their website in april. it is revised and updated every year. please rate or give feedback on this page and i will make a donation to wateraid. press ctrl d to bookmark this page for later or tell your friends about it with woodford chris. water pollution. retrieved from https www. explainthatstuff. com waterpollution. html. water pollution has been documented as a contributor to a wide range of health problems and disorders in humans. it has also been shown to have drastically negative impacts on wild animals and the environment as a whole. there are quite a few different effects of the types of water pollution that are of significant importance to humans. water pollution can pose health dangers to humans who come into contact with it either directly or indirectly. the risks of your health being negatively impacted by polluted drinking water in a developed country is small in comparison with developing countries. however it is possible to become ill from contaminated water. when you are out hiking you can acquire giardiasis that can lead to the presentation of acute symptoms like vomiting and intense nausea. this infection is caused by drinking water that has been fouled by animal wastes in untreated waterways. in anthropogenic environments like cities and towns the potential toxins are far more numerous. the effects of agricultural runoff and land pollution have on waterways rivers streams and ultimately the ocean introduces toxic chemcials and livestock waste into water supplies and the ocean. hurricane damage and flooding of farms and farmlands have resulted in an ever increasing amount of toxic pollutants in water to the detriment of human marine and aquatic life. health risks from pollution vary from area to area. one of the most pervasive non localized water pollution issues facing the world today is the level of mercury in the oceans. inorganic mercury is a common byproduct of a number of industrial processes. the level of mercury in fish is mostly dangerous for small children and women who might become pregnant are pregnant or are nursing. mercury has been found to interfere with the development of the central nervous system in fetuses and young children which could potentially lead to a large amount of long term side effects. in louisiana water quality can be so bad in many waterways that fish advisories are often posted. people are warned against eating fish from these contaminated waterways. this is largely due to industrial runoff from localized sources and the accumulative effects of runoff and dumping from states that lie along the mississippi river. when the river empties into louisiana it brings those accumulated toxins with it. this is believed to lead to higher rates of cancer in areas surrounding the mississippi delta in an area that is colloquially referred to as cancer alley. phosphorous runoff from industry can get into waterways and create toxic algal blooms. these blooms have been linked to higher occurrences of paralytic shellfish poisoning in humans which can lead to death. according to the national park service the minnesota pollution control agency has taken on the project to clean up the mississippi river. the ambitious goal is to restore the river so it is once more fishable and swimmable. the mpca has teamed up with numerous partners to work on cleaning up the mississippi river and warns it will take several years to undo decades of damage. water pollution also causes negative effects within the environment to animals and their habitats. the entrance of pollutants into waterways can have a wide range of impacts. it is possible for the pollutants to raise the temperature of the water enough to force fish out in search of cooler waters. this can itself create an ecological deadzone. water pollution can also significantly increase the rate of algal blooms. these blooms create massive fish die offs as the oxygen in the water gets depleted and the fish suffocate. fish can also be killed when excessive algae get caught in their gills. oil spills are a common occurrence throughout the world however major spills like the exxon valdez and the bp deepwater horizon disaster have shown what water pollution can do on a very large scale. it was found that dolphins have been dying in record numbers near the site of the bp deepwater horizon disaster. it has also been found that the oil from the bp disaster has gotten into wetlands which are considered the nursery for nearly every creature that lives in the area. the effects of water pollution are not always immediate. they arent always seen at the point of contamination. they are sometimes never known by the person responsible for the pollution. however water pollution has a huge impact on the lives of all people. with knowledge consideration and preparation water pollution can be decreased. it doesnt take much effort just a little thought. our editors will review what you ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. water pollution is the release of substances into bodies of water that makes water unsafe for human use and disrupts aquatic ecosystems. water pollution can be caused by a plethora of different contaminants including toxic waste petroleum and disease causing microorganisms. human activities that generate domestic sewage and toxic waste cause water pollution by contaminating water with disease causing microorganisms and poisonous substances. oil spills are another source of water pollution that have devastating impacts on surrounding ecosystems. sewage can promote algae growth which can eventually result in eutrophic dead zones where aquatic life can not survive because of a lack of oxygen. microplastics are often found in marine wildlife and can become concentrated in humans who consume seafood because of biomagnification. oil spills such as the deepwater horizon oil spill in strand and kill many different marine species. while some studies point to human activity as a catalyst for red tide scientists are unsure about its cause. red tide is a common term for harmful algal blooms that often poison or kill wildlife and humans who consume contaminated seafood. red tides can severely impact ecosystems and local economies. water pollution the release of substances into subsurface groundwater or into lakes streams rivers estuaries and oceans to the point where the substances interfere with beneficial use of the water or with the natural functioning of ecosystems. in addition to the release of substances such as chemicals or microorganisms water pollution may also include the release of energy in the form of radioactivity or heat into bodies of water. water bodies can be polluted by a wide variety of substances including pathogenic microorganisms putrescible organic waste plant nutrients toxic chemicals sediments heat petroleum and radioactive substances. several types of water pollutants are considered below. domestic sewage is the primary source of pathogens and putrescible organic substances. because pathogens are excreted in feces all sewage from cities and towns is likely to contain pathogens of some type potentially presenting a direct threat to public health. putrescible organic matter presents a different sort of threat to water quality. as organics are decomposed naturally in the sewage by bacteria and other microorganisms the dissolved oxygen content of the water is depleted. this endangers the quality of lakes and streams where high levels of oxygen are required for fish and other aquatic organisms to survive. sewage treatment processes reduce the levels of pathogens and organics in wastewater but they do not eliminate them completely. domestic sewage is also a major source of plant nutrients mainly nitrates and phosphates. excess nitrates and phosphates in water promote the growth of algae sometimes causing unusually dense and rapid growths known as algal blooms. when the algae die oxygen dissolved in the water declines because microorganisms use oxygen to digest algae during the process of decomposition. anaerobic organisms then metabolize the organic wastes releasing gases such as methane and hydrogen sulfide which are harmful to the aerobic forms of life. the process by which a lake changes from a clean clear conditionwith a relatively low concentration of dissolved nutrients and a balanced aquatic communityto a nutrient rich algae filled state and thence to an oxygen deficient waste filled condition is called eutrophication. eutrophication is a naturally occurring slow and inevitable process. however when it is accelerated by human activity and water pollution it can lead to the premature aging and death of a body of water. waste is considered toxic if it is poisonous radioactive explosive carcinogenic mutagenic teratogenic or bioaccumulative. sources of toxic chemicals include improperly disposed wastewater from industrial plants and chemical process facilities as well as surface runoff containing pesticides used on agricultural areas and suburban lawns. sediment resulting from soil erosion can be carried into water bodies by surface runoff. suspended sediment interferes with the penetration of sunlight and upsets the ecological balance of a body of water. also it can disrupt the reproductive cycles of fish and other forms of life and when it settles out of suspension it can smother bottom dwelling organisms. heat is considered to be a water pollutant because it decreases the capacity of water to hold dissolved oxygen in solution and it increases the rate of metabolism of fish. valuable species of game fish can not survive in water with very low levels of dissolved oxygen. a major source of heat is the practice of discharging cooling water from power plants into rivers the discharged water may be as much as c warmer than the naturally occurring water. petroleum pollution occurs when oil from roads and parking lots is carried in surface runoff into water bodies. accidental oil spills are also a source of oil pollutionas in the devastating spills from the tanker exxon valdez and from the deepwater horizon oil rig. oil slicks eventually move toward shore harming aquatic life and damaging recreation areas. groundwaterwater contained in underground geologic formations called aquifersis a source of drinking water for many people. for example about half the people in the united states depend on groundwater for their domestic water supply. although groundwater may appear crystal clear it may still be polluted by dissolved chemicals and by bacteria and viruses. sources of chemical contaminants include poorly designed or poorly maintained subsurface sewage disposal systems industrial wastes disposed of in improperly lined or unlined landfills or lagoons leachates from unlined municipal refuse landfills mining and petroleum production and leaking underground storage tanks below gasoline service stations. in coastal areas increasing withdrawal of groundwater can cause saltwater intrusion as the water table drops seawater is drawn into wells. although estuaries and oceans contain vast volumes of water their natural capacity to absorb pollutants is limited. contamination from sewage outfall pipes from dumping of sludge or other wastes and from oil spills can harm marine life especially microscopic phytoplankton that serve as food for larger aquatic organisms. sometimes unsightly and dangerous waste materials can be washed back to shore littering beaches with hazardous debris. by an estimated. million and. million tonnes of plastic debris had been dumped into the oceans annually and floating plastic waste had accumulated in earth s five subtropical gyres that cover percent of the world s oceans. another ocean pollution problem is the seasonal formation of dead zones in certain coastal areas. the cause is nutrient enrichment from dispersed agricultural runoff and concomitant algal blooms. dead zones occur worldwide one of the largest of these forms annually in the gulf of mexico beginning at the mississippi river delta. water pollutants come from either point sources or dispersed sources. a point source is a pipe or channel such as those used for discharge from an industrial facility or a city sewerage system. a dispersed source is a very broad unconfined area from which a variety of pollutants enter the water body such as the runoff from an agricultural area. point sources of water pollution are easier to control than dispersed sources because the contaminated water has been collected and conveyed to one single point where it can be treated. pollution from dispersed sources is difficult to control and despite much progress in the building of modern sewage treatment plants dispersed sources continue to cause a large fraction of water pollution problems. although pure water is rarely found in nature the characterization of water quality is a function of the intended use of the water. for example water that is clean enough for swimming and fishing may not be clean enough for drinking and cooking. water quality standards provide a legal framework for the prevention of water pollution of all types. there are several types of water quality standards. stream standards are those that classify streams rivers and lakes on the basis of their maximum beneficial use they set allowable levels of specific substances or qualities allowed in those bodies of water based on their given classification. effluent standards set specific limits on the levels of contaminants allowed in the final discharges from wastewater treatment plants. drinking water standards include limits on the levels of specific contaminants allowed in potable water delivered to homes for domestic use. in the united states the clean water act and its amendments regulate water quality and set minimum standards for waste discharges for each industry as well as regulations for specific problems such as toxic chemicals and oil spills. in the european union water quality is governed by the water framework directive the drinking water directive and other laws. humans are increasingly influencing the climate and the earths temperature by burning fossil fuels cutting down forests and farming livestock. this adds enormous amounts of greenhouse gases to those naturally occurring in the atmosphere increasing the greenhouse effect and global warming. the main driver of climate change is the greenhouse effect. some gases in the earths atmosphere act a bit like the glass in a greenhouse trapping the suns heat and stopping it from leaking back into space and causing global warming. many of these greenhouse gases occur naturally but human activity is increasing the concentrations of some of them in the atmosphere in particular co produced by human activities is the largest contributor to global warming. by its concentration in the atmosphere had risen to above its pre industrial level. other greenhouse gases are emitted by human activity in smaller quantities. methane is a more powerful greenhouse gas than co but has a shorter atmospheric lifetime. nitrous oxide like co is a long lived greenhouse gas that accumulates in the atmosphere over decades to centuries. natural causes such as changes in solar radiation or volcanic activity are estimated to have contributed less than plus or minus. c to total warming between and. was the warmest decade recorded with global average temperature reaching. c above pre industrial levels in. human induced global warming is presently increasing at a rate of. c per decade. an increase of compared to the temperature in pre industrial times is associated with serious negative impacts on to the natural environment and human health and wellbeing including a much higher risk that dangerous and possibly catastrophic changes in the global environment will occur. for this reason the international community has recognised the need to keep warming well below and pursue efforts to limit it to. c. share this page models that account only for the effects of natural processes are not able to explain the warming observed over the past century. models that also account for the greenhouse gases emitted by humans are able to explain this warming. click the image to view a larger version. earths temperature depends on the balance between energy entering and leaving the planets system. when incoming energy from the sun is absorbed by the earth system earth warms. when the suns energy is reflected back into space earth avoids warming. when absorbed energy is released back into space earth cools. many factors both natural and human can cause changes in earths energy balance including these factors have caused earths climate to change many times. scientists have pieced together a record of earths climate dating back hundreds of thousands of years by analyzing a number of indirect measures of climate such as ice cores tree rings glacier lengths pollen remains and ocean sediments and by studying changes in earths orbit around the sun. this record shows that the climate system varies naturally over a wide range of time scales. in general climate changes prior to the industrial revolution in the s can be explained by natural causes such as changes in solar energy volcanic eruptions and natural changes in greenhouse gas concentrations. recent climate changes however can not be explained by natural causes alone. research indicates that natural causes do not explain most observed warming especially warming since the mid century. rather it is extremely likely that human activities have been the dominant cause of that warming. top of pageradiative forcing is a measure of the influence of a particular factor on the net change in earths energy balance. on average a positive radiative forcing tends to warm the surface of the planet while a negative forcing tends to cool the surface. ghgs have a positive forcing because they absorb energy radiating from earths surface rather than allowing it to be directly transmitted into space. this warms the atmosphere like a blanket. aerosols or small particles can have a positive or negative radiative forcing depending on how they absorb and emit heat or reflect light. for example black carbon aerosols have a positive forcing since they absorb sunlight. sulfate aerosols have a negative forcing since they reflect sunlight back into space. noaas annual ghg index which tracks changes in radiative forcing from ghgs over time shows that such forcing from human added ghgs has increased. percent between and. increases in co in the atmosphere are responsible for of the increase. the contribution to radiative forcing by ch and cfcs has been nearly constant or declining respectively in recent years. when sunlight reaches earths surface it can either be reflected back into space or absorbed by earth. once absorbed the planet releases some of the energy back into the atmosphere as heat. greenhouse gases like water vapor carbon dioxide and methane absorb energy slowing or preventing the loss of heat to space. in this way ghgs act like a blanket making earth warmer than it would otherwise be. this process is commonly known as the greenhouse effect. over the last several hundred thousand years co levels varied in tandem with the glacial cycles. during warm interglacial periods co levels were higher. during cool glacial periods co levels were lower. the heating or cooling of earths surface and oceans can cause changes in the natural sources and sinks of these gases and thus change greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. these changing concentrations are thought to have acted as a positive feedback amplifying the temperature changes caused by long term shifts in earths orbit. estimates of the earth s changing co concentration and antarctic temperature based on analysis of ice core data extending back years. until the past century natural factors caused atmospheric co concentrations to vary within a range of about to parts per million by volume. warmer periods coincide with periods of relatively high co concentrations. note the past century s temperature changes and rapid co rise are not shown here. increases over the past half century are shown in the recent role section. click the image to view a larger version. source based on data appearing in nrc. climate feedbacks amplify or reduce direct warming and cooling effects. they do not change the planets temperature directly. feedbacks that amplify changes are called positive feedbacks. feedbacks that counteract changes are called negative feedbacks. feedbacks are associated with changes in surface reflectivity clouds water vapor and the carbon cycle. water vapor appears to cause the most important positive feedback. as earth warms the rate of evaporation and the ability of air to hold water vapor both rise increasing the amount of water vapor in the air. because water vapor is a greenhouse gas this leads to further warming. the melting of arctic sea ice is another example of a positive climate feedback. as temperatures rise sea ice retreats. the loss of ice exposes the underlying sea surface which is darker and absorbs more sunlight than ice increasing the total amount of warming. some types of clouds cause a negative feedback. warming temperatures can increase the amount or reflectivity of these clouds reflecting more sunlight back into space cooling the surface of the planet. other types of clouds however contribute a positive feedback. there are also several positive feedbacks that increase ghg concentrations. for example as temperatures warm these changes lead to higher concentrations of atmospheric ghgs and contribute to increased warming. since the industrial revolution began around human activities have contributed substantially to climate change by adding co and other heat trapping gases to the atmosphere. these greenhouse gas emissions have increased the greenhouse effect and caused earths surface temperature to rise. the primary human activity affecting the amount and rate of climate change is greenhouse gas emissions from the burning of fossil fuels. the most important ghgs directly emitted by humans include carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide and several others. the sources and recent trends of these gases are detailed below. carbon dioxide is the primary greenhouse gas that is contributing to recent climate change. co is absorbed and emitted naturally as part of the carbon cycle through plant and animal respiration volcanic eruptions and ocean atmosphere exchange. human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels and changes in land use release large amounts of co causing concentrations in the atmosphere to rise. atmospheric co concentrations have increased by more than since pre industrial times from approximately parts per million by volume in the century to over ppmv in. the monthly average concentration at mauna loa now exceeds ppmv for the first time in human history. the current co level is higher than it has been in at least years. some volcanic eruptions released large quantities of co in the distant past. however the u. s. geological survey reports that human activities now emit more than times as much co as volcanoes each year. human activities currently release over billion tons of co into the atmosphere every year. the resultant build up of co in the atmosphere is like a tub filling with water where more water flows from the faucet than the drain can take away. for more information on the human and natural sources and sinks of co emissions and actions that can reduce emissions see the carbon dioxide page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. methane is produced through both natural and human activities. for example natural wetlands agricultural activities and fossil fuel extraction and transport all emit ch. methane is more abundant in earths atmosphere now than at any time in at least the past years. due to human activities ch concentrations increased sharply during most of the century and are now more than two and a half times pre industrial levels. in recent decades the rate of increase has slowed considerably. for more information on ch emissions and sources and actions that can reduce emissions see epas methane page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. for information on how methane is impacting the arctic see the epa report methane and black carbon impacts on the arctic. nitrous oxide is produced through natural and human activities mainly through agricultural activities and natural biological processes. fuel burning and some other processes also create no. concentrations of no have risen approximately since the start of the industrial revolution with a relatively rapid increase toward the end of the century. overall no concentrations have increased more rapidly during the past century than at any time in the past years. for more information on no emissions and sources and actions that can reduce emissions see epas nitrous oxide page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. for more information on greenhouse gas emissions see the greenhouse gas emissions website including an expanded discussion of global warming potentials and how they are used to measure the relative strengths of greenhouse gases. to learn more about actions that can reduce these emissions see what you can do. particles and aerosols in the atmosphere can also affect climate. human activities such as burning fossil fuels and biomass contribute to emissions of these substances although some aerosols also come from natural sources such as volcanoes and marine plankton. for more information on greenhouse gas emissions see the greenhouse gas emissions website. to learn more about actions that can reduce these emissions see what epa is doing and what you can do. top of pagethe sun s energy received at the top of earth s atmosphere has been measured by satellites since. it has followed its natural year cycle of small ups and downs but with no net increase. over the same period global temperature has risen markedly. click the image to view a larger version. source usgcrp. climate is influenced by natural changes that affect how much solar energy reaches earth. these changes include changes within the sun and changes in earths orbit. changes occurring in the sun itself can affect the intensity of the sunlight that reaches earths surface. the intensity of the sunlight can cause either warming or cooling. the sun follows a natural year cycle of small ups and downs in intensity but the effect on earths climate is small. changes in the shape of earths orbit as well as the tilt and position of earths axis can also affect the amount of sunlight reaching earths surface. changes in the suns intensity have influenced earths climate in the past. for example the so called little ice age between the and centuries may have been partially caused by a low solar activity phase from to which coincided with cooler temperatures. the little ice age refers to a slight cooling of north america europe and probably other areas around the globe. changes in earths orbit have had a big impact on climate over tens to hundreds of thousands of years. in fact the amount of summer sunshine on the northern hemisphere which is affected by changes in the planets orbit appears to drive the advance and retreat of ice sheets. these changes appear to be the primary cause of past cycles of ice ages in which earth has experienced long periods of cold temperatures as well as shorter interglacial periods of relatively warmer temperatures. click to learn about how rates of climate change have varied over time. changes in solar energy continue to affect climate. however over the last year solar cycle solar output has been lower than it has been since the mid century and therefore does not explain the recent warming of the earth. similarly changes in the shape of earths orbit as well as the tilt and position of earths axis affect temperature on very long timescales and therefore can not explain the recent warming. when sunlight reaches earth it can be reflected or absorbed. the amount that is reflected or absorbed depends on earths surface and atmosphere. light colored objects and surfaces like snow and clouds tend to reflect most sunlight while darker objects and surfaces like the ocean forests or soil tend to absorb more sunlight. the term albedo refers to the amount of solar radiation reflected from an object or surface often expressed as a percentage. earth as a whole has an albedo of about meaning that of the sunlight that reaches the planet is absorbed. absorbed sunlight warms earths land water and atmosphere. reflectivity is also affected by aerosols. aerosols are small particles or liquid droplets in the atmosphere that can absorb or reflect sunlight. unlike greenhouse gases the climate effects of aerosols vary depending on what they are made of and where they are emitted. those aerosols that reflect sunlight such as particles from volcanic eruptions or sulfur emissions from burning coal have a cooling effect. those that absorb sunlight such as black carbon have a warming effect. natural changes in reflectivity like the melting of sea ice have contributed to climate change in the past often acting as feedbacks to other processes. volcanoes have played a noticeable role in climate. volcanic particles that reach the upper atmosphere can reflect enough sunlight back to space to cool the surface of the planet by a few tenths of a degree for several years. these particles are an example of cooling aerosols. volcanic particles from a single eruption do not produce long term change because they remain in the atmosphere for a much shorter time than ghgs. human changes in land use and land cover have changed earths reflectivity. processes such as deforestation reforestation desertification and urbanization often contribute to changes in climate in the places they occur. these effects may be significant regionally but are smaller when averaged over the entire globe. in addition human activities have generally increased the number of aerosol particles in the atmosphere. overall human generated aerosols have a net cooling effect offsetting about one third of the total warming effect associated with human greenhouse gas emissions. reductions in overall aerosol emissions can therefore lead to more warming. however targeted reductions in black carbon emissions can reduce warming. top of page usgcrp. climate change impacts in the united states the third national climate assessment. richmond and gary w. yohe eds. u. s. global change research program. ipcc. climate change the physical science basis. contribution of working group i to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. cambridge university press cambridge united kingdom and new york ny usa. nrc. advancing the science of climate changes. national research council. the national academies press washington dc usa. top of pagestudies of earths past climate suggest periods of relative stability as well as periods of rapid change. periods of relative stability interglacial climate periods such as the present tend to be more stable than cooler glacial climates. for example earths climate during the current interglacial period is more stable than the most recent glacial period. the glacial period was characterized by widespread large and abrupt climate changes. in contrast the previous interglacial period was similarly stable. periods of abrupt climate change abrupt climate change refers to sudden large changes in some major component of the climate system with rapid widespread effects. abrupt or rapid climate changes tend to frequently accompany transitions between glacial and interglacial periods. for example a significant part of the northern hemisphere particularly around greenland may have experienced very rapid warming of f f over several decades during and after the most recent ice age. abrupt climate changes occur when a threshold or tipping point in the climate system is crossed causing large changes or impacts to the climate. scientific data show that abrupt changes in climate at the regional scale have occurred throughout history and are characteristic of earths climate system. warming from greenhouse gas emissions as well as other human changes to the earth system may increase the possibility of large and abrupt regional or global climatic events. contact us to ask a question provide feedback or report a problem. last updated on december ontemporary climate change includes both the global warming caused by humans and its impacts on earths weather patterns. there have been previous periods of climate change but the current changes are more rapid than any known events in earths history. the main cause is the emission of greenhouse gases mostly carbon dioxide and methane. burning fossil fuels for energy use creates most of these emissions. agriculture steel making cement production and forest loss are additional sources. temperature rise is also affected by climate feedbacks such as the loss of sunlight reflecting snow cover and the release of carbon dioxide from drought stricken forests. collectively these amplify global warming. on land temperatures have risen about twice as fast as the global average. deserts are expanding while heat waves and wildfires are becoming more common. increased warming in the arctic has contributed to melting permafrost glacial retreat and sea ice loss. higher temperatures are also causing more intense storms and other weather extremes. in places such as coral reefs mountains and the arctic many species are forced to relocate or become extinct as their environment changes. climate change threatens people with food and water scarcity increased flooding extreme heat more disease and economic loss. it can also drive human migration. the world health organization calls climate change the greatest threat to global health in the century. even if efforts to minimise future warming are successful some effects will continue for centuries. these include sea level rise and warmer more acidic oceans. many of these impacts are already felt at the current level of warming which is about. c. the intergovernmental panel on climate change projects even greater impacts as warming continues to. c and beyond. additional warming also increases the risk of triggering tipping points such as the melting of the greenland ice sheet. responding to these changes involves taking actions to limit the amount of warming and adapting to them. future warming can be reduced by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and removing them from the atmosphere. this will involve using more wind and solar energy phasing out coal and increasing energy efficiency. switching to electric vehicles to public transport and to heat pumps for homes and commercial buildings would further limit emissions. prevention of deforestation and enhancing forests can help absorb co. some communities may adapt to climate change through better coastline protection disaster management and development of more resistant crops. by themselves these efforts to adapt can not avert the risk of severe widespread and permanent impacts. under the paris agreement nations collectively agreed to keep warming well under c through mitigation efforts. however with pledges made under the agreement global warming would still reach about. c by the end of the century. limiting warming to. c would require halving emissions by and achieving net zero emissions by. before the s it was unclear whether warming by greenhouse gases would dominate aerosol induced cooling. scientists then often used the term inadvertent climate modification to refer to the human impact on the climate. in the s the terms global warming and climate change were popularised. the former refers only to increased surface warming the latter describes the full effect of greenhouse gases on the climate. global warming became the most popular term after nasa climate scientist james hansen used it in his testimony in the u. s. senate. in the s the term climate change increased in popularity. global warming usually refers to human induced warming of the earth system whereas climate change can refer to natural or anthropogenic change. the two terms are often used interchangeably. various scientists politicians and media figures have adopted the terms climate crisis or climate emergency to talk about climate change and global heating instead of global warming. the policy editor in chief of the guardian said they included this language in their editorial guidelines to ensure that we are being scientifically precise while also communicating clearly with readers on this very important issue. in oxford languages chose climate emergency as its word of the year defining it as a situation in which urgent action is required to reduce or halt climate change and avoid potentially irreversible environmental damage resulting from it. multiple independent instrumental datasets show that the climate system is warming. the decade warmed. c compared to the pre industrial baseline. surface temperatures are rising by about. c per decade with reaching a temperature of. c above pre industrial. since the number of cold days and nights has decreased and the number of warm days and nights has increased. there was little net warming between the century and the mid century. climate information for that period comes from climate proxies such as trees and ice cores. they show that natural variations offset the early effects of the industrial revolution. thermometer records began to provide global coverage around. historical patterns of warming and cooling like the medieval climate anomaly and the little ice age did not occur at the same time across different regions. temperatures may have reached as high as those of the late century in a limited set of regions. there have been prehistorical episodes of global warming such as the paleoceneeocene thermal maximum. however the modern observed rise in temperature and co concentrations has been so rapid that even abrupt geophysical events in earths history do not approach current rates. evidence of warming from air temperature measurements are reinforced with a wide range of other observations. there has been an increase in the frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation melting of snow and land ice and increased atmospheric humidity. flora and fauna are also behaving in a manner consistent with warming for instance plants are flowering earlier in spring. another key indicator is the cooling of the upper atmosphere which demonstrates that greenhouse gases are trapping heat near the earths surface and preventing it from radiating into space. regions warm at various rates. the pattern is independent of where greenhouse gases are emitted because the gases persist long enough to diffuse across the planet. since the pre industrial period the average surface temperature over land regions has increased almost twice as fast as the global average surface temperature. this is because of the larger heat capacity of oceans and because oceans lose more heat by evaporation. the thermal energy in the global climate system has grown with only brief pauses since at least and over of this extra energy has been stored in the ocean. the rest has heated the atmosphere melted ice and warmed the continents. the northern hemisphere and the north pole have warmed much faster than the south pole and southern hemisphere. the northern hemisphere not only has much more land but also more seasonal snow cover and sea ice. as these surfaces flip from reflecting a lot of light to being dark after the ice has melted they start absorbing more heat. local black carbon deposits on snow and ice also contribute to arctic warming. arctic temperatures are increasing at over twice the rate of the rest of the world. melting of glaciers and ice sheets in the arctic disrupts ocean circulation including a weakened gulf stream further changing the climate. the climate system experiences various cycles on its own which can last for years decades or even centuries. other changes are caused by an imbalance of energy that is external to the climate system but not always external to the earth. examples of external forcings include changes in the concentrations of greenhouse gases solar luminosity volcanic eruptions and variations in the earths orbit around the sun. to determine the human contribution to climate change known internal climate variability and natural external forcings need to be ruled out. a key approach is to determine unique fingerprints for all potential causes then compare these fingerprints with observed patterns of climate change. for example solar forcing can be ruled out as a major cause. its fingerprint would be warming in the entire atmosphere. yet only the lower atmosphere has warmed consistent with greenhouse gas forcing. attribution of recent climate change shows that the main driver is elevated greenhouse gases but that aerosols also have a strong effect. the earth absorbs sunlight then radiates it as heat. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb and reemit infrared radiation slowing the rate at which it can pass through the atmosphere and escape into space. before the industrial revolution naturally occurring amounts of greenhouse gases caused the air near the surface to be about c warmer than it would have been in their absence. while water vapour and clouds are the biggest contributors to the greenhouse effect they increase as a function of temperature and are therefore feedbacks. on the other hand concentrations of gases such as co tropospheric ozone cfcs and nitrous oxide are not temperature dependent and are therefore external forcings. human activity since the industrial revolution mainly extracting and burning fossil fuels has increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere resulting in a radiative imbalance. in the concentrations of co and methane had increased by about and respectively since. these co levels are higher than they have been at any time during the last million years. concentrations of methane are far higher than they were over the last years. global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in excluding those from land use change were equivalent to billion tonnes of co. of these emissions was co was methane was nitrous oxide and was fluorinated gases. co emissions primarily come from burning fossil fuels to provide energy for transport manufacturing heating and electricity. additional co emissions come from deforestation and industrial processes which include the co released by the chemical reactions for making cement steel aluminum and fertiliser. methane emissions come from livestock manure rice cultivation landfills wastewater and coal mining as well as oil and gas extraction. nitrous oxide emissions largely come from the microbial decomposition of inorganic and organic fertiliser. from a production standpoint the primary sources of global greenhouse gas emissions are estimated as electricity and heat agriculture and forestry industry and manufacturing transport and buildings. despite the contribution of deforestation to greenhouse gas emissions the earths land surface particularly its forests remain a significant carbon sink for co. natural processes such as carbon fixation in the soil and photosynthesis more than offset the greenhouse gas contributions from deforestation. the land surface sink is estimated to remove about of annual global co emissions. the ocean also serves as a significant carbon sink via a two step process. first co dissolves in the surface water. afterwards the oceans overturning circulation distributes it deep into the oceans interior where it accumulates over time as part of the carbon cycle. over the last two decades the worlds oceans have absorbed to of emitted co. air pollution in the form of aerosols not only puts a large burden on human health but also affects the climate on a large scale. from to a gradual reduction in the amount of sunlight reaching the earths surface was observed a phenomenon popularly known as global dimming typically attributed to aerosols from biofuel and fossil fuel burning. globally aerosols have been declining since meaning that they no longer mask greenhouse gas warming as much. aerosols scatter and absorb solar radiation. they also have indirect effects on the earths radiation budget. sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets. these clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets. they also reduce the growth of raindrops which makes clouds more reflective to incoming sunlight. indirect effects of aerosols are the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing. while aerosols typically limit global warming by reflecting sunlight black carbon in soot that falls on snow or ice can contribute to global warming. not only does this increase the absorption of sunlight it also increases melting and sea level rise. limiting new black carbon deposits in the arctic could reduce global warming by. c by. humans change the earths surface mainly to create more agricultural land. today agriculture takes up of earths land area while is forests and is uninhabitable. the amount of forested land continues to decrease largely due to conversion to cropland in the tropics. this deforestation is the most significant aspect of land surface change affecting global warming. the main causes of deforestation are permanent land use change from forest to agricultural land producing products such as beef and palm oil logging to produce forestry forest products short term shifting cultivation and wildfires. land use changes not only affect greenhouse gas emissions. the type of vegetation in a region affects the local temperature. it impacts how much of the sunlight gets reflected back into space and how much heat is lost by evaporation. for instance the change from a dark forest to grassland makes the surface lighter causing it to reflect more sunlight. deforestation can also affect temperatures by modifying the release of chemical compounds that influence clouds and by changing wind patterns. in tropic and temperate areas the net effect is to produce significant warming while at latitudes closer to the poles a gain of albedo leads to a cooling effect. globally these effects are estimated to have led to a slight cooling dominated by an increase in surface albedo. physical climate models are unable to reproduce the rapid warming observed in recent decades when taking into account only variations in solar output and volcanic activity. as the sun is the earths primary energy source changes in incoming sunlight directly affect the climate system. solar irradiance has been measured directly by satellites and indirect measurements are available from the early s onwards. there has been no upward trend in the amount of the suns energy reaching the earth. further evidence for greenhouse gases causing global warming comes from measurements that show a warming of the lower atmosphere coupled with a cooling of the upper atmosphere. if solar variations were responsible for the observed warming the troposphere and stratosphere would both warm. explosive volcanic eruptions represent the largest natural forcing over the industrial era. when the eruption is sufficiently strong sunlight can be partially blocked for a couple of years. the temperature signal lasts about twice as long. in the industrial era volcanic activity has had negligible impacts on global temperature trends. present day volcanic co emissions are equivalent to less than of current anthropogenic co emissions. the response of the climate system to an initial forcing is modified by feedbacks increased by self reinforcing feedbacks and reduced by balancing feedbacks. the main reinforcing feedbacks are the water vapour feedback the icealbedo feedback and probably the net effect of clouds. the primary balancing mechanism is radiative cooling as earths surface gives off more heat to space in response to rising temperature. in addition to temperature feedbacks there are feedbacks in the carbon cycle such as the fertilizing effect of co on plant growth. uncertainty over feedbacks is the major reason why different climate models project different magnitudes of warming for a given amount of emissions. as air gets warmer it can hold more moisture. after initial warming due to emissions of greenhouse gases the atmosphere will hold more water. water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas so this further heats the atmosphere. if cloud cover increases more sunlight will be reflected back into space cooling the planet. if clouds become higher and thinner they act as an insulator reflecting heat from below back downwards and warming the planet. overall the net cloud feedback over the industrial era has probably exacerbated temperature rise. the reduction of snow cover and sea ice in the arctic reduces the albedo of the earths surface. more of the suns energy is now absorbed in these regions contributing to amplification of arctic temperature changes. arctic amplification is also melting permafrost which releases methane and co into the atmosphere. around half of human caused co emissions have been absorbed by land plants and by the oceans. on land elevated co and an extended growing season have stimulated plant growth. climate change increases droughts and heat waves that inhibit plant growth which makes it uncertain whether this carbon sink will continue to grow in the future. soils contain large quantities of carbon and may release some when they heat up. as more co and heat are absorbed by the ocean it acidifies its circulation changes and phytoplankton takes up less carbon decreasing the rate at which the ocean absorbs atmospheric carbon. climate change can increase methane emissions from wetlands marine and freshwater systems and permafrost. future warming depends on the strengths of climate feedbacks and on emissions of greenhouse gases. the former are often estimated using climate models developed by multiple scientific institutions. a climate model is a representation of the physical chemical and biological processes that affect the climate system. models include changes in the earths orbit historical changes in the suns activity and volcanic forcing. computer models attempt to reproduce and predict the circulation of the oceans the annual cycle of the seasons and the flows of carbon between the land surface and the atmosphere. models project different future temperature rises for given emissions of greenhouse gases they do not fully agree on the strength of different feedbacks on climate sensitivity and magnitude of inertia of the climate system. the physical realism of models is tested by examining their ability to simulate contemporary or past climates. past models have underestimated the rate of arctic shrinkage and underestimated the rate of precipitation increase. sea level rise since was underestimated in older models but more recent models agree well with observations. the united states published national climate assessment notes that climate models may still be underestimating or missing relevant feedback processes. a subset of climate models add societal factors to a simple physical climate model. these models simulate how population economic growth and energy use affect and interact with the physical climate. with this information these models can produce scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions. this is then used as input for physical climate models to generate climate change projections. in some scenarios emissions continue to rise over the century while others have reduced emissions. fossil fuel resources are too abundant for shortages to be relied on to limit carbon emissions in the century. emissions scenarios can be combined with modelling of the carbon cycle to predict how atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases might change in the future. according to these combined models by the atmospheric concentration of co could be as low as or as high as ppm depending on the socioeconomic scenario and the mitigation scenario. the ipcc sixth assessment report projects that global warming is very likely to reach. c to. c by the late century under the very low ghg emissions scenario. in an intermediate scenario global warming would reach. c to. c and. c to. c under the very high ghg emissions scenario. these projections are based on climate models in combination with observations. the remaining carbon budget is determined by modelling the carbon cycle and the climate sensitivity to greenhouse gases. according to the ipcc global warming can be kept below. c with a two thirds chance if emissions after do not exceed or gigatonnes of co. this corresponds to to years of current emissions. there are high uncertainties about the budget. for instance it may be gigatonnes of co smaller due to methane release from permafrost and wetlands. the environmental effects of climate change are broad and far reaching affecting oceans ice and weather. changes may occur gradually or rapidly. evidence for these effects comes from studying climate change in the past from modelling and from modern observations. since the s droughts and heat waves have appeared simultaneously with increasing frequency. extremely wet or dry events within the monsoon period have increased in india and east asia. the rainfall rate and intensity of hurricanes and typhoons is likely increasing. frequency of tropical cyclones has not increased as a result of climate change. global sea level is rising as a consequence of glacial melt melt of the ice sheets in greenland and antarctica and thermal expansion. between and the rise increased over time averaging.. mm per year. over the century the ipcc projects that in a very high emissions scenario the sea level could rise by cm. increased ocean warmth is undermining and threatening to unplug antarctic glacier outlets risking a large melt of the ice sheet and the possibility of a meter sea level rise by under high emissions. climate change has led to decades of shrinking and thinning of the arctic sea ice. while ice free summers are expected to be rare at. c degrees of warming they are set to occur once every three to ten years at a warming level of c. higher atmospheric co concentrations have led to changes in ocean chemistry. an increase in dissolved co is causing oceans to acidify. in addition oxygen levels are decreasing as oxygen is less soluble in warmer water. dead zones in the ocean regions with very little oxygen are expanding too. the greater the amount of global warming the greater the risk of passing through tipping points thresholds beyond which certain impacts can no longer be avoided even if temperatures are reduced. an example is the collapse of west antarctic and greenland ice sheets where a temperature rise of. to c may commit the ice sheets to melt although the time scale of melt is uncertain and depends on future warming. some large scale changes could occur over a short time period such as a collapse of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation which would trigger major climate changes in the north atlantic europe and north america. the long term effects of climate change include further ice melt ocean warming sea level rise and ocean acidification. on the timescale of centuries to millennia the magnitude of climate change will be determined primarily by anthropogenic co emissions. this is due to cos long atmospheric lifetime. oceanic co uptake is slow enough that ocean acidification will continue for hundreds to thousands of years. these emissions are estimated to have prolonged the current interglacial period by at least years. sea level rise will continue over many centuries with an estimated rise of. metres per degree celsius after years. recent warming has driven many terrestrial and freshwater species poleward and towards higher altitudes. higher atmospheric co levels and an extended growing season have resulted in global greening. however heatwaves and drought have reduced ecosystem productivity in some regions. the future balance of these opposing effects is unclear. climate change has contributed to the expansion of drier climate zones such as the expansion of deserts in the subtropics. the size and speed of global warming is making abrupt changes in ecosystems more likely. overall it is expected that climate change will result in the extinction of many species. the oceans have heated more slowly than the land but plants and animals in the ocean have migrated towards the colder poles faster than species on land. just as on land heat waves in the ocean occur more frequently due to climate change harming a wide range of organisms such as corals kelp and seabirds. ocean acidification makes it harder for organisms such as mussels barnacles and corals to produce shells and skeletons and heatwaves have bleached coral reefs. harmful algal blooms enhanced by climate change and eutrophication lower oxygen levels disrupt food webs and cause great loss of marine life. coastal ecosystems are under particular stress. almost half of global wetlands have disappeared due to climate change and other human impacts. ecological collapse. bleaching has damaged the great barrier reef and threatens reefs worldwide. extreme weather. drought and high temperatures worsened the bushfires in australia. arctic warming. permafrost thaws undermine infrastructure and release methane a greenhouse gas. habitat destruction. many arctic animals rely on sea ice which has been disappearing in a warming arctic. pest propagation. mild winters allow more pine beetles to survive to kill large swaths of forest. the effects of climate change on humans mostly due to warming and shifts in precipitation have been detected worldwide. impacts are now observable on all continents and across ocean regions with low latitude less developed areas facing the greatest risk. continued warming has potentially severe pervasive and irreversible impacts for people and ecosystems. the risks are unevenly distributed but are generally greater for disadvantaged people in developing and developed countries. health impacts include both the direct effects of extreme weather leading to injury and loss of life and indirect effects such as undernutrition brought on by crop failures. various infectious diseases are more easily transmitted in a warmer climate such as dengue fever which affects children most severely and malaria. young children are the most vulnerable to food shortages and together with older people to extreme heat. the world health organization has estimated that between and climate change is expected to cause around additional deaths per year from heat exposure in elderly people increases in diarrheal disease malaria dengue coastal flooding and childhood undernutrition. over additional adult deaths are projected yearly by due to reductions in food availability and quality. other major health risks associated with climate change include air and water quality. the who has classified human impacts from climate change as the greatest threat to global health in the century. climate change is affecting food security. it has caused reduction in global mean yields of maize wheat and soybeans between and. future warming could further reduce global yields of major crops. crop production will probably be negatively affected in low latitude countries while effects at northern latitudes may be positive or negative. up to an additional million people worldwide particularly those with lower incomes are at risk of hunger as a consequence of these impacts. the effects of warming on the oceans impact fish stocks with a global decline in the maximum catch potential. only polar stocks are showing an increased potential. regions dependent on glacier water regions that are already dry and small islands are at increased risk of water stress due to climate change. economic damages due to climate change may be severe and there is a probability of disastrous tail risk events. climate change has likely already increased global economic inequality and this trend is projected to continue. most of the severe impacts are expected in sub saharan africa and south east asia where existing poverty is already exacerbated. the world bank estimates that climate change could drive over million people into poverty by. current inequalities between men and women between rich and poor and between different ethnicities have been observed to worsen as a consequence of climate variability and climate change. an expert elicitation concluded that the role of climate change in armed conflict has been small compared to factors such as socio economic inequality and state capabilities but that future warming will bring increasing risks. low lying islands and coastal communities are threatened through hazards posed by sea level rise such as flooding and permanent submergence. this could lead to statelessness for populations in island nations such as the maldives and tuvalu. in some regions rise in temperature and humidity may be too severe for humans to adapt to. with worst case climate change models project that almost one third of humanity might live in extremely hot and uninhabitable climates similar to the current climate found in the sahara. these factors plus weather extremes can drive environmental migration both within and between countries. displacement of people is expected to increase as a consequence of more frequent extreme weather sea level rise and conflict arising from increased competition over natural resources. climate change may also increase vulnerability leading to trapped populations who are not able to move due to a lack of resources. environmental migration. sparser rainfall leads to desertification that harms agriculture and can displace populations. shown telly mali. agricultural changes. droughts rising temperatures and extreme weather negatively impact agriculture. shown texas us. tidal flooding. sea level rise increases flooding in low lying coastal regions. shown venice italy. storm intensification. bangladesh after cyclone sidr is an example of catastrophic flooding from increased rainfall. heat wave intensification. events like the june european heat wave are becoming more common. climate change can be mitigated by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and by enhancing sinks that absorb greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. in order to limit global warming to less than. c with a high likelihood of success global greenhouse gas emissions needs to be net zero by or by with a c target. this requires far reaching systemic changes on an unprecedented scale in energy land cities transport buildings and industry. the united nations environment programme estimates that countries need to triple their pledges under the paris agreement within the next decade to limit global warming to c. an even greater level of reduction is required to meet the. c goal. with pledges made under the agreement as of october global warming would still have a chance of reaching about. c by the end of the century. although there is no single pathway to limit global warming to. or c most scenarios and strategies see a major increase in the use of renewable energy in combination with increased energy efficiency measures to generate the needed greenhouse gas reductions. to reduce pressures on ecosystems and enhance their carbon sequestration capabilities changes would also be necessary in agriculture and forestry such as preventing deforestation and restoring natural ecosystems by reforestation. other approaches to mitigating climate change have a higher level of risk. scenarios that limit global warming to. c typically project the large scale use of carbon dioxide removal methods over the century. there are concerns though about over reliance on these technologies and environmental impacts. solar radiation management is also a possible supplement to deep reductions in emissions. however srm would raise significant ethical and legal issues and the risks are poorly understood. renewable energy is key to limiting climate change. fossil fuels accounted for of the worlds energy in. the remaining share was split between nuclear power and renewables. that mix is projected to change significantly over the next years. solar and wind have seen substantial growth and progress over the last few years. solar panels and onshore wind are the cheapest forms of adding new power generation capacity in most countries. renewables represented of all new electricity generation installed in nearly all solar and wind. meanwhile nuclear power share remains the same but costs are increasing. nuclear power generation is now several times more expensive per megawatt hour than wind and solar. to achieve carbon neutrality by renewable energy would become the dominant form of electricity generation rising to or more by in some scenarios. the use of electricity for heating and transport would rise to the point where electricity becomes the largest form of energy. investment in coal would be eliminated and coal use nearly phased out by. in transport scenarios envision sharp increases in the market share of electric vehicles of public transport and of a switch to low carbon fuel for other transportation modes like shipping. heating would be increasingly decarbonised with the use of technologies like heat pumps. there are obstacles to the continued rapid growth of renewables. for solar and wind power a key challenge is their intermittency and seasonal variability. traditionally hydro dams with reservoirs and conventional power plants have been used when variable energy production is low. intermittency is further countered by expanding battery storage and matching energy demand and supply. long distance transmission can smooth variability of renewable output across wider geographic areas. there can be environmental and land use concerns with large solar and wind projects while bioenergy is often not carbon neutral and may have negative consequences for food security. hydropower growth has been slowing and is set to decline further due to concerns about social and environmental impacts. low carbon energy improves human health by minimising climate change and has the near term benefit of reducing air pollution deaths which were estimated at million annually in. meeting the paris agreement goals that limit warming to a c increase could save about a million of those lives per year by whereas limiting global warming to. c could save millions and simultaneously increase energy security and reduce poverty. reducing energy demand is another major aspect of reducing emissions. if less energy is needed there is more flexibility for clean energy development. it also makes it easier to manage the electricity grid and minimises carbon intensive infrastructure development. major increases in energy efficiency investment will be required to achieve climate goals comparable to the level of investment in renewable energy. several covid related changes in energy use patterns energy efficiency investments and funding have made forecasts for this decade more difficult and uncertain. strategies to reduce energy demand vary by sector. in transport passengers and freight can switch to more efficient travel modes such as buses and trains or use electric vehicles. industrial strategies to reduce energy demand include increasing the energy efficiency of heating systems and motors designing less energy intensive products and increasing product lifetimes. in the building sector the focus is on better design of new buildings and aiming for higher levels of energy efficiency in retrofitting. the use of technologies like heat pumps can also increase building energy efficiency. agriculture and forestry face a triple challenge of limiting greenhouse gas emissions preventing the further conversion of forests to agricultural land and meeting increases in world food demand. a set of actions could reduce agriculture and forestry based emissions by two thirds from levels. these include reducing growth in demand for food and other agricultural products increasing land productivity protecting and restoring forests and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural production. steel and cement production responsible for about of industrial co emissions present particular challenges. in these industries carbon intensive materials such as coke and lime play an integral role in the production so that reducing co emissions requires research into alternative chemistries. natural carbon sinks can be enhanced to sequester significantly larger amounts of co beyond naturally occurring levels. reforestation and tree planting on non forest lands are among the most mature sequestration techniques although the latter raises food security concerns. soil carbon sequestration and coastal carbon sequestration are less understood options. the feasibility of land based negative emissions methods for mitigation are uncertain the ipcc has described mitigation strategies based on them as risky. where energy production or co intensive heavy industries continue to produce waste co the gas can be captured and stored instead of released to the atmosphere. although its current use is limited in scale and expensive carbon capture and storage may be able to play a significant role in limiting co emissions by mid century. this technique in combination with bio energy can result in net negative emissions co is drawn from the atmosphere. it remains highly uncertain whether carbon dioxide removal techniques such as beccs will be able to play a large role in limiting warming to. c. policy decisions that rely on carbon dioxide removal increase the risk of global warming rising beyond international goals. adaptation is the process of adjustment to current or expected changes in climate and its effects. without additional mitigation adaptation can not avert the risk of severe widespread and irreversible impacts. more severe climate change requires more transformative adaptation which can be prohibitively expensive. the capacity and potential for humans to adapt is unevenly distributed across different regions and populations and developing countries generally have less. the first two decades of the century saw an increase in adaptive capacity in most low and middle income countries with improved access to basic sanitation and electricity but progress is slow. many countries have implemented adaptation policies. however there is a considerable gap between necessary and available finance. adaptation to sea level rise consists of avoiding at risk areas learning to live with increased flooding and protection. if that fails managed retreat may be needed. there are economic barriers for tackling dangerous heat impact. avoiding strenuous work or having air conditioning is not possible for everybody. in agriculture adaptation options include a switch to more sustainable diets diversification erosion control and genetic improvements for increased tolerance to a changing climate. insurance allows for risk sharing but is often difficult to get for people on lower incomes. education migration and early warning systems can reduce climate vulnerability. ecosystems adapt to climate change a process that can be supported by human intervention. by increasing connectivity between ecosystems species can migrate to more favourable climate conditions. species can also be directly moved. protection and restoration of natural and semi natural areas helps build resilience making it easier for ecosystems to adapt. many of the actions that promote adaptation in ecosystems also help humans adapt via ecosystem based adaptation. for instance restoration of natural fire regimes makes catastrophic fires less likely and reduces human exposure. giving rivers more space allows for more water storage in the natural system reducing flood risk. restored forest acts as a carbon sink but planting trees in unsuitable regions can exacerbate climate impacts. there are synergies and trade offs between adaptation and mitigation. adaptation often offer short term benefits whereas mitigation has longer term benefits. increased use of air conditioning allows people to better cope with heat but increases energy demand. compact urban development may lead to reduced emissions from transport and construction. at the same time it may increase the urban heat island effect leading to higher temperatures and increased exposure. increased food productivity has large benefits for both adaptation and mitigation. countries that are most vulnerable to climate change have typically been responsible for a small share of global emissions. this raises questions about justice and fairness. climate change is strongly linked to sustainable development. limiting global warming makes it easier to achieve sustainable development goals such as eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities. the connection is recognised in sustainable development goal which is to ake urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. the goals on food clean water and ecosystem protection have synergies with climate mitigation. the geopolitics of climate change is complex. it has often been framed as a free rider problem in which all countries benefit from mitigation done by other countries but individual countries would lose from switching to a low carbon economy themselves. this framing has been challenged. for instance the benefits of a coal phase out to public health and local environments exceed the costs in almost all regions. furthermore net importers of fossil fuels win economically from switching to clean energy causing net exporters to face stranded assets fossil fuels they can not sell. a wide range of policies regulations and laws are being used to reduce emissions. as of carbon pricing covers about of global greenhouse gas emissions. carbon can be priced with carbon taxes and emissions trading systems. direct global fossil fuel subsidies reached billion in and. trillion when indirect costs such as air pollution are priced in. ending these can cause a reduction in global carbon emissions and a reduction in air pollution deaths. subsidies could be used to support the transition to clean energy instead. more direct methods to reduce greenhouse gases include vehicle efficiency standards renewable fuel standards and air pollution regulations on heavy industry. several countries require utilities to increase the share of renewables in power production. policy designed through the lens of climate justice tries to address human rights issues and social inequality. for instance wealthy nations responsible for the largest share of emissions would have to pay poorer countries to adapt. as the use of fossil fuels is reduced jobs in the sector are being lost. to achieve a just transition these people would need to be retrained for other jobs. communities with many fossil fuel workers would need additional investments. nearly all countries in the world are parties to the united nations framework convention on climate change. the goal of the unfccc is to prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system. as stated in the convention this requires that greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilised in the atmosphere at a level where ecosystems can adapt naturally to climate change food production is not threatened and economic development can be sustained. the unfccc does not itself restrict emissions but rather provides a framework for protocols that do. global emissions have risen since the unfccc was signed. its yearly conferences are the stage of global negotiations. the kyoto protocol extended the unfccc and included legally binding commitments for most developed countries to limit their emissions. during the negotiations the g pushed for a mandate requiring developed countries to the lead in reducing their emissions since developed countries contributed most to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. per capita emissions were also still relatively low in developing countries and developing countries would need to emit more to meet their development needs. theopenhagen accord has been widely portrayed as disappointing because of its low goals and was rejected by poorer nations including the g. associated parties aimed to limit the global temperature rise to below c. the accord set the goal of sending billion per year to developing countries for mitigation and adaptation by and proposed the founding of the green climate fund. as of the fund has failed to reach its expected target and risks a shrinkage in its funding. in all un countries negotiated the paris agreement which aims to keep global warming well below. c and contains an aspirational goal of keeping warming under. c. the agreement replaced the kyoto protocol. unlike kyoto no binding emission targets were set in the paris agreement. instead a set of procedures was made binding. countries have to regularly set ever more ambitious goals and reevaluate these goals every five years. the paris agreement restated that developing countries must be financially supported. as of october states and the european union have signed the treaty and states and the eu have ratified or acceded to the agreement. the montreal protocol an international agreement to stop emitting ozone depleting gases may have been more effective at curbing greenhouse gas emissions than the kyoto protocol specifically designed to do so. the kigali amendment to the montreal protocol aims to reduce the emissions of hydrofluorocarbons a group of powerful greenhouse gases which served as a replacement for banned ozone depleting gases. this made the montreal protocol a stronger agreement against climate change. in the united kingdom parliament became the first national government to declare a climate emergency. other countries and jurisdictions followed suit. that same year the european parliament declared a climate and environmental emergency. the european commission presented its european green deal with the goal of making the eu carbon neutral by. major countries in asia have made similar pledges south korea and japan have committed to become carbon neutral by and china by. in the european commission released its fit for legislation package which contains guidelines for the car industry all new cars on the european market must be zero emission vehicles from. while india has strong incentives for renewables it also plans a significant expansion of coal in the country. as of based on information from national climate plans which represent of the parties to the paris agreement estimated total greenhouse gas emissions will be. lower compared to levels below the or reduction goals to limit global warming to. c or c respectively. there is a near complete scientific consensus that the climate is warming and that this is caused by human activities. agreement in recent literature reached over. older surveys found to of climate scientists agreeing on humanitys role in causing climate change based on the exact question and who responded. no scientific body of national or international standing disagrees with this view. consensus has further developed that some form of action should be taken to protect people against the impacts of climate change. national science academies have called on world leaders to cut global emissions. scientific discussion takes place in journal articles that are peer reviewed. scientists assess these every few years in the intergovernmental panel on climate change reports. the ipcc assessment report stated that it is unequivocal that climate change is caused by humans. climate change came to international public attention in the late s. due to confusing media coverage in the early s people often confounded climate change with other environmental issues like ozone depletion. in popular culture the first movie to reach a mass public on the topic was the day after tomorrow in followed a few years later by the al gore documentary an inconvenient truth. books stories and films about climate change fall under the genre of climate fiction. significant regional gender age and political differences exist in both public concern for and understanding of climate change. more highly educated people and in some countries women and younger people were more likely to see climate change as a serious threat. partisan gaps also exist in many countries and countries with high co emissions tend to be less concerned. views on causes of climate change vary widely between countries. concern has increased over time to the point where a majority of citizens in many countries now express a high level of worry about climate change or view it as a global emergency. higher levels of worry are associated with stronger public support for policies that address climate change. public debate about climate change has been strongly affected by climate change denial and misinformation which originated in the united states and has since spread to other countries particularly canada and australia. the actors behind climate change denial form a well funded and relatively coordinated coalition of fossil fuel companies industry groups conservative think tanks and contrarian scientists. like the tobacco industry before the main strategy of these groups has been to manufacture doubt about scientific data and results. many who deny dismiss or hold unwarranted doubt about the scientific consensus on anthropogenic climate change are labelled as climate change skeptics which several scientists have noted is a misnomer. there are different variants of climate denial some deny that warming takes place at all some acknowledge warming but attribute it to natural influences and some minimise the negative impacts of climate change. manufacturing uncertainty about the science later developed into a manufactured controversy creating the belief that there is significant uncertainty about climate change within the scientific community in order to delay policy changes. strategies to promote these ideas include criticism of scientific institutions and questioning the motives of individual scientists. an echo chamber of climate denying blogs and media has further fomented misunderstanding of climate change. climate protests have risen in popularity in the s. these protests demand that political leaders take action to prevent climate change. they can take the form of public demonstrations fossil fuel divestment lawsuits and other activities. prominent demonstrations include the school strike for climate. in this initiative young people across the globe have been protesting since by skipping school on fridays inspired by swedish teenager greta thunberg. mass civil disobedience actions by groups like extinction rebellion have protested by disrupting roads and public transport. litigation is increasingly used as a tool to strengthen climate action from public institutions and companies. activists also initiate lawsuits which target governments and demand that they take ambitious action or enforce existing laws on climate change. lawsuits against fossil fuel companies generally seek compensation for loss and damage. in the s joseph fourier proposed the greenhouse effect to explain why earths temperature was higher than the suns energy alone could explain. earths atmosphere is transparent to sunlight so sunlight reaches the surface where it is converted to heat. however the atmosphere is not transparent to heat radiating from the surface and captures some of that heat which warms the planet. in eunice newton foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air and the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide. she concluded that an atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature... starting in john tyndall established that nitrogen and oxygentogether totalling of dry airare transparent to radiated heat. however water vapour and some gases absorb radiated heat and re radiate that heat within the atmosphere. tyndall proposed that changes in the concentrations of these gases may have caused climatic changes in the past including ice ages. svante arrhenius noted that water vapour in air continuously varied but the co concentration in air was influenced by long term geological processes. at the end of an ice age warming from increased co levels would increase the amount of water vapour amplifying warming in a feedback loop. in he published the first climate model of its kind showing that halving of co levels could have produced the drop in temperature initiating the ice age. arrhenius calculated the temperature increase expected from doubling co to be around c. other scientists were initially sceptical and believed the greenhouse effect to be saturated so that adding more co would make no difference. they thought climate would be self regulating. from onwards guy stewart callendar published evidence that climate was warming and co levels rising but his calculations met the same objections. in the s gilbert plass created a detailed computer model that included different atmospheric layers and the infrared spectrum. this model predicted that increasing co levels would cause warming. around the same time hans suess found evidence that co levels had been rising and roger revelle showed that the oceans would not absorb the increase. the two scientists subsequently helped charles keeling to begin a record of continued increase which has been termed the keeling curve. scientists alerted the public and the dangers were highlighted at james hansensongressional testimony. the intergovernmental panel on climate change set up in to provide formal advice to the worlds governments spurred interdisciplinary research. ar working group ii reportjump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. a since the industrial revolution the global annual temperature has increased in total by a little more than degree celsius or about degrees fahrenheit. between the year that accurate recordkeeping beganand it rose on average by. degrees celsius every years. since however the rate of increase has more than doubled for the last years we ve seen the global annual temperature rise by. degrees celsius or. degrees fahrenheit per decade. the result a planet that has never been hotter. nine of the warmest years since have occurred since and the warmest years on record have all occurred since. climate change deniers have argued that there has been a pause or a slowdown in rising global temperatures but numerous studies including a paper published in the journal environmental research letters have disproved this claim. the impacts of global warming are already harming people around the world. now climate scientists have concluded that we must limit global warming to. degrees celsius by if we are to avoid a future in which everyday life around the world is marked by its worst most devastating effects the extreme droughts wildfires floods tropical storms and other disasters that we refer to collectively as climate change. these effects are felt by all people in one way or another but are experienced most acutely by the underprivileged the economically marginalized and people of color for whom climate change is often a key driver of poverty displacement hunger and social unrest. a global warming occurs when carbon dioxide and other air pollutants collect in the atmosphere and absorb sunlight and solar radiation that have bounced off the earth s surface. normally this radiation would escape into space but these pollutants which can last for years to centuries in the atmosphere trap the heat and cause the planet to get hotter. these heat trapping pollutantsspecifically carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide water vapor and synthetic fluorinated gasesare known as greenhouse gases and their impact is called the greenhouse effect. though natural cycles and fluctuations have caused the earth s climate to change several times over the last years our current era of global warming is directly attributable to human activityspecifically to our burning of fossil fuels such as coal oil gasoline and natural gas which results in the greenhouse effect. in the united states the largest source of greenhouse gases is transportation followed closely by electricity production and industrial activity. curbing dangerous climate change requires very deep cuts in emissions as well as the use of alternatives to fossil fuels worldwide. the good news is that countries around the globe have formally committedas part of the paris climate agreementto lower their emissions by setting new standards and crafting new policies to meet or even exceed those standards. the not so good news is that we re not working fast enough. to avoid the worst impacts of climate change scientists tell us that we need to reduce global carbon emissions by as much as percent by. for that to happen the global community must take immediate concrete steps to decarbonize electricity generation by equitably transitioning from fossil fuelbased production to renewable energy sources like wind and solar to electrify our cars and trucks and to maximize energy efficiency in our buildings appliances and industries. a scientists agree that the earth s rising temperatures are fueling longer and hotter heat waves more frequent droughts heavier rainfall and more powerful hurricanes. in for example scientists concluded that a lengthy drought in californiathe state s worst water shortage in yearshad been intensified by to percent by global warming. they also said the odds of similar droughts happening in the future had roughly doubled over the past century. and in the national academies of science engineering and medicine announced that we can now confidently attribute some extreme weather events like heat waves droughts and heavy precipitation directly to climate change. the earth s ocean temperatures are getting warmer toowhich means that tropical storms can pick up more energy. in other words global warming has the ability to turn a category storm into a more dangerous category storm. in fact scientists have found that the frequency of north atlantic hurricanes has increased since the early s as has the number of storms that reach categories and. the atlantic hurricane season included a record breaking tropical storms major hurricanes and hurricanes altogether. with increased intensity come increased damage and death. the united states saw an unprecedented weather and climate disasters that caused at least a billion dollars worth of damage in but was the costliest on record and among the deadliest as well taken together that years tropical storms caused nearly billion in damage and led to more than fatalities. the impacts of global warming are being felt everywhere. extreme heat waves have caused tens of thousands of deaths around the world in recent years. and in an alarming sign of events to come antarctica has lost nearly four trillion metric tons of ice since the s. the rate of loss could speed up if we keep burning fossil fuels at our current pace some experts say causing sea levels to rise several meters in the next to years and wreaking havoc on coastal communities worldwide. a each year scientists learn more about the consequences of global warming and each year we also gain new evidence of its devastating impact on people and the planet. as the heat waves droughts and floods associated with climate change become more frequent and more intense communities suffer and death tolls rise. if we re unable to reduce our emissions scientists believe that climate change could lead to the deaths of more than people around the globe every year and force million people into poverty by. global warming is already taking a toll on the united states. and if we aren t able to get a handle on our emissions here s just a smattering of what we can look forward to though everyone is affected by climate change not everyone is affected equally. indigenous people people of color and the economically marginalized are typically hit the hardest. inequities built into our housing health care and labor systems make these communities more vulnerable to the worst impacts of climate changeeven though these same communities have done the least to contribute to it. a in recent years china has taken the lead in global warming pollution producing about percent of all co emissions. the united states comes in second. despite making up just percent of the world s population our nation produces a sobering percent of all global co emissionsnearly as much as the european union and india combined. and america is still number one by far in cumulative emissions over the past years. as a top contributor to global warming the united states has an obligation to help propel the world to a cleaner safer and more equitable future. our responsibility matters to other countries and it should matter to us too. a we ve started. but in order to avoid the worsening effects of climate change we need to do a lot moretogether with other countriesto reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and transition to clean energy sources. under the administration of president donald trump the united states withdrew from the paris climate agreement rolled back or eliminated dozens of clean air protections and opened up federally managed lands including culturally sacred national monuments to fossil fuel development. although president biden has pledged to get the country back on track years of inaction during and before the trump administrationand our increased understanding of global warming s serious impactsmean we must accelerate our efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. despite the lack of cooperation from the trump administration local and state governments made great strides during this period through efforts like the american cities climate challenge and ongoing collaborations like the regional greenhouse gas initiative. meanwhile industry and business leaders have been working with the public sector creating and adopting new clean energy technologies and increasing energy efficiency in buildings appliances and industrial processes. today the american automotive industry is finding new ways to produce cars and trucks that are more fuel efficient and is committing itself to putting more and more zero emission electric vehicles on the road. developers cities and community advocates are coming together to make sure that new affordable housing is built with efficiency in mind reducing energy consumption and lowering electric and heating bills for residents. and renewable energy continues to surge as the costs associated with its production and distribution keep falling. in renewable energy sources such as wind and solar provided more electricity than coal for the very first time in u. s. history. president biden has made action on global warming a high priority. on his first day in office he recommitted the united states to the paris climate agreement sending the world community a strong signal that we were determined to join other nations in cutting our carbon pollution to support the shared goal of preventing the average global temperature from rising more than. degrees celsius above preindustrial levels. and significantly the president has assembled a climate team of experts and advocates who have been tasked with pursuing action both abroad and at home while furthering the cause of environmental justice and investing in nature based solutions. a no while we can t win the fight without large scale government action at the national level we also can t do it without the help of individuals who are willing to use their voices hold government and industry leaders to account and make changes in their daily habits. wondering how you can be a part of the fight against global warming reduce your own carbon footprint by taking a few easy steps make conserving energy a part of your daily routine and your decisions as a consumer. when you shop for new appliances like refrigerators washers and dryers look for products with the government s energy star label they meet a higher standard for energy efficiency than the minimum federal requirements. when you buy a car look for one with the highest gas mileage and lowest emissions. you can also reduce your emissions by taking public transportation or carpooling when possible. and while new federal and state standards are a step in the right direction much more needs to be done. voice your support of climate friendly and climate change preparedness policies and tell your representatives that equitably transitioning from dirty fossil fuels to clean power should be a top prioritybecause it s vital to building healthy more secure communities. you don t have to go it alone either. movements across the country are showing how climate action can build community be led by those on the front lines of its impacts and create a future that s equitable and just for all. demand climate actionlearn morethis story was originally published on march and has been updated with new information and links. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. it s urgent. it s ambitious. but most of all it s totally doable. the western city of ahmedabad is preparing residents to cope with the longer and more intense heat waves sweeping across south asiaand inspiring other indian cities and states to follow suit. by increasing the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere we re amplifying the planet s natural greenhouse effect and turning up the dial on global warming. the most widespread damaging storms on earth are getting worse and climate change is a big reason why. here s a look at what causes hurricanes and how to address the threat of a wetter windier world. the u. n. report warns that dire impacts from climate change will arrive sooner than many expected. here s why we need to follow the report s advice and why every ton of emissions reductions can make a difference. healing the planet starts at homein your garage in your kitchen and at your dining room table. short answer yes. even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet. what is your city doing about climate change ask your local leaders these five questions. how smog soot greenhouse gases and other top air pollutants are affecting the planetand your health. as temperatures and carbon levels rise even breathing has become a challenge. here s what you can do to help clear the air. nrdc senior attorney ben longstreth explains how plaintiffs for these cases get chosenand how you can help advance the cause in or out of the courtroom. gun control activists want to use financial levers to curtail firearm sales. can we do the same for carbon emissions when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosurestogether for the environment. human healthwe all drink water that comes from a source this may be a lake or local river. in countries that have poor screening and purification practices people often get water borne disease outbreaks such as cholera and tuberculosis. every year there are an estimated million cholera cases and deaths due to cholera. in developed countries even where there are better purification methods people still suffer from the health effects of water pollution. take toxins emitted by algae growth for instance this can cause stomach aches and rashes. excess nitrogen in drinking water also poses serious risks to infants. epa s nationallakes assessment found that almost per cent of the nation s lakes have high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus pollution. the report also showed that poor lake conditions related to nitrogen or phosphorus pollution doubled the likelihood of poor ecosystem health.. ecosystemsnutrient pollution from upstream often flow downhill and even travel miles into other larger water bodies. the effect is that it breeds algae growth and causes the growth of many more water organism. this algae attack affects fish and other aquatic animals by absorbing and reducing their oxygen supply. algae growth also clogs fish gills. naturally the order of ecosystems in that water are affected negatively as the destruction or introduction of any foreign organism alter the entire food chain in there.. death of animalsanimals including water animals die when water is poisoned for various reasons. other animals are stressed and their populations are endangered. in a classic case of marine pollution in recent time miles of a us coastline was affected by an oil spill. that water pollution caused a lot of damage and deaths of many animals. over animals were reported dead just months after the spill including many that are already on the endangered species list. immediate impact on the wildlife includes oil coated birds and sea turtles mammal ingestion of oil and dead or dying deep sea coral. animals are also affected by solid waste thrown into water bodies as they harm them in many ways.. economic costfrom the above it is evident that there is some real financial implications that will result from water pollution. it can cost a lot more to purify drinking water that takes its source from nutrient polluted water bodies. fishing stock is affected negatively when there is a depletion of oxygen. consumers are also wary of fish from these sources and tend to stay away from them costing fisheries to lose revenue. in places where there are water activities or sports lots of money is spent to clean up the water from algae blooms and the like. the u. s. tourism industry loses close to billion each year mostly from losses in fishing and recreational activities because of nutrient polluted water bodies. in mississippi alone tourism in the three counties that border the gulf coast accounts for about. billion in visitor expenditures percent of state travel and tourism tax revenues and direct jobs. imagine this picture unep reports that around the world onethis is the idea of not making too much wasteconsidering the threats facing ecosystems we can begin to appreciateas long as humans live there will be the needopen access is an initiative that aims to make scientific research freely available to all. to date our community has made over million downloads. it s based on principles of collaboration unobstructed discovery and most importantly scientific progression. as phd students we found it difficult to access the research we needed so we decided to create a new open access publisher that levels the playing field for scientists across the world. how by making research easy to access and puts the academic needs of the researchers before the business interests of publishers. we are a community of more than authors and editors from institutions spanning countries including nobel prize winners and some of the world s most cited researchers. publishing on intechopen allows authors to earn citations and find new collaborators meaning more people see your work not only from your own field of study but from other related fields too. brief introduction to this section that descibes open access especially from an intechopen perspectivewant to get in touch contact our london head office or media team hereour team is growing all the time so we re always on the lookout for smart people who want to help us reshape the world of scientific publishing. open access peer reviewed chapterby inyinbor adejumoke a. adebesin babatunde o. oluyori abimbola p. adelani akande tabitha a. dada adewumi o. and oreofe toyin a. submitted april reviewed october published march doi. intechopen. home books water challenges of an urbanizing worlddownloaded the stress on our water environment as a result of increased industrialization which aids urbanization is becoming very high thus reducing the availability of clean water. polluted water is of great concern to the aquatic organism plants humans and climate and indeed alters the ecosystem. the preservation of our water environment which is embedded in sustainable development must be well driven by all sectors. while effective wastewater treatment has the tendency of salvaging the water environment integration of environmental policies into the actor firms core objectives coupled with continuous periodical enlightenment on the present and future consequences of environmental water pollution will greatly assist in conserving the water environment. address all correspondence to inyinbor. adejumoke landmarkuniversity. edu. ngdoi. intechopen. water challenges of an urbanizing worldedited by matja glavanindustrialization in any society is a major initiator of development and urbanization. although the merits of industrialization are innumerable it has been identified as a major threat to the environment as it releases various toxic chemicals gases solid wastes as well as microbes of various kinds into our immediate environmentland air and water. of particular interest is water pollution which has become a global challenge developing nations being highly affected due to their drive for development. pollution of our water bodies poses a great threat to humans and the aquatic ecosystem while marked population increase catalyzes climatic changes. for instance various human activities as well as the release of greenhouse gases by industries greatly contributes to global warming planet temperature enhancement and lowering of atmospheric air quality. the drive for sustainable development must bring along water pollution prevention techniques. effective wastewater treatment before their eventual discharge is one way to driving water pollution prevention. some remediate climate change mitigation measures against water pollution can also be explored. this chapter is aimed at critically discussing water pollution effects viz a viz global challenges threat and climatic impacts while also focusing on various possible preventive measures. sustainable development in any society is an access to initiate a good standard of living for the populace. it aims at providing solutions to the economic environmental and societal challenges without posing a threat to human and environmental future development that is we must consider the future as we make present decisions. also these include social progress and equality environmental protection conservation of natural resources and stable economic growth. there are numerous instances where urbanization has destroyed the environment and threatened its survival chances. sustainable development put into consideration how we survive in the natural world protecting it from destruction and damages. one of the major challenges of urbanization is sustainability as most developed or developing society now revitalizes a lot of natural resources daily. most of these resources meet the needs of man but they are also limited. sustainable development tends to balance the competing needs of the society. in achieving this many science bodies and institutions have seen the requisite of sustainable development and have set goals and targets to meet it. this also has pushed such institutions to have a role in measuring and monitoring the impact of these goals on the society. however the contribution of scientist in sustainable development should not only focus on the environment. it should also take into consideration the health of the populace in ensuring that no area of life suffers. while sustainable development may mean different things to different people environmental sustainability is all encompassing. it is directly concerned with the future of humanity and it defines how we should protect and handle the sustainability of resources air quality water quality and ecosystems. it also helps to prevent the environment from impending damage from technological advancement. one way to achieving environmental sustainability is via effective wastewater treatment. various conventional wastewater treatment methods are available their characteristics vary from complexities of operations through sludge generations among other things to various inadequacies. their economic disadvantages are widely related to expensive equipment complexities of operations and skilful manpower requirement. many industries avoid the conventional wastewater treatment methods due to their economic disadvantages hence discharging untreated or fairly treated wastewater into the water bodies. a simple and cheap wastewater treatment method will therefore facilitate effective wastewater treatment and protect the water environment from pollution. water is an essential and general need of life with an undeniable effect directly or indirectly. all industrial environmental and metabolic processes are water dependent. in living organisms water plays a number of roles such as solvent temperature buffer metabolite living environment and lubricants. water however is said to be polluted when some of the water quality parameters have been hampered by unguided and irregularities from several anthropogenic activities thus rendering water unfit for intended use. water pollution may pose serious threat to the environment as well as lives. pollutant effects may vary depending on their types and source. for instance while heavy metals dyes and some other organic pollutants have been identified as carcinogens hormones pharmaceuticals and cosmetics and personal care product wastes are known as endocrine disruptive chemicals. these pollutants which enter into the water body through various channel but predominantly anthropogenic have become a great concern to environmentalists due to various hazard they pose on the environment. heavy metals top the list of inorganic pollutant with wide range of negative effects on aquatic organisms plants and human. heavy metals are released into the environment via different routes such as industries mining activities agricultural activities etc.. bioavailable metals present in the soil may be absorbed by plants resulting in serious plant metabolism dysfunctioning. high heavy metal ion concentrations are also known to damage the cell membrane affect enzyme involved in chlorophyll production thus reducing photosynthetic rate as well as affect plant reproduction via decrease in pollen and seed viability. humans and animals can be exposed to heavy metal toxicity through the food web direct consumption of water containing metal or via inhalation. heavy metals readily bioaccumulates in vegetables and enters into man and animal through food chain. effects of heavy metal toxicity on human ranges from mild eye nose and skin irritations through severe headache stomach ache diarrhea hematemesis vomiting dizziness to organ dysfunctioning such as cirrhosis necrosis low blood pressure hypertension and gastrointestinal distress. while some heavy metals also called essential elements are required in minute amount in the body for various biochemical processes others such as lead cadmium arsenic and mercury are of serious threat and considered foreign in the body. looking at specifics human ingestion of water polluted with arsenic can cause cancer of the lungs liver and bladder. kidney and lungs damage as well as bone fragility may result when cadmium containing water is ingested. exposure to lead can severely damage the brain and kidneys. in children lead exposure even at very low concentration may hamper learning cause memory loss affect attention and response functions and generally make children aggressive. in pregnant women high levels of exposure to lead may cause miscarriage whereas in men it can damage the organs responsible for sperm production. mercury is unique amidst other heavy metals it has the capacity to travel a wide range of distance thus have been classified as a global pollutants. the chemical form of mercury in the environment is also important in analyzing their toxicity. the organic form of mercury that is methyl mercury and dimethyl mercury is known to be more toxic than inorganic mercury. while inhaled mercury goes into the blood stream their elimination from the body is either through the urine or faeces. mercury has the ability to exist in the urine for about months hence their renal dysfunctioning characteristic. many physiological disorders may accompany crustaceans exposure to metals and instant metabolic activities alterations. exposure of crustaceans to heavy metals may also result in loss of appetite for food and subsequently body weight loss. continuous exposure may reduce reproduction in adults as well as hamper the growth larvae. organic pollutants are very wide in variety with a huge range of toxicity. among the list of organic pollutants that has been of great threat to aquatic organisms plants and humans are dyes plant and animal pharmaceuticals personal care products wastes as well as petroleum organic pollutants. a group of chemicals referred to as endocrine disruptive chemicals also belongs to the organic pollutants group which are classed as emerging contaminants. edcs are described as external agents that interfere with hormonal activities thus affecting the normal homeostatic reproduction development or behavior. dyes are water soluble giant chemical that is greatly used in many industries viz textile leather and tanning food paper etc. to impact color on products. aquatic organisms plants and humans are greatly affected by dyes presence in water. they impede sunlight penetration into water bodies and reduce dissolved oxygen thus leading to death of photosynthetic organism and other lives within the aquatic environment. humans may be exposed to dye toxicity via consumption of vegetables and fish which bioaccumulate dyes. the use of colored paper towels used in drying hands and in food preparation is another route of exposure to human. dyes are considered as carcinogenic and mutagenic thus their removal from wastewater before disposal is ultimately important. human and veterinary pharmaceuticals which are members of edcs are chemicals used as curative or preventive of various diseases. veterinary pharmaceutical may also serve the purpose of increasing efficiency of food production. pharmaceuticals are used widely and unavoidably thus they enter into the environment through one of these routes indiscriminate disposal of hospital and household waste landfill leaching drainage water and sewage. although pharmaceuticals have been found to exist in various environmental samples at the ng l to g l levels it is considered a great threat to both aquatic lives and humans. the presence of pharmaceuticals in water is known to pose both acute and chronic toxicity on aquatic organisms. edcs as their name implies causes abnormal endocrine activities and increase cancer risk in human. their effects on aquatic lives may range from endocrine system disruption through the reduction in eggs and sperm cells production to feminization of female aquatics. water is one important part of our day to day activities and their preservation can never be overemphasized. three quarter of the fluid in man is made of water and it forms the essential medium in which the biochemical reactions take place in human body. water moves blood from one place to the other in the body and helps in digestion electrically charged ions which generate nerve signals that make the human brain possible are also held and transported by water. water is a good solvent and it is usually referred to as universal solvent all the major components in cells that is protein deoxyribonucleic acid and polysaccharides are all soluble in water. pure water is tasteless odorless and transparent and thus provides a habitat for aquatic plants and organisms because sunlight can reach them within the water. though clean water is a vital commodity for the well being of human but unfortunately the availability of fresh water is unevenly distributed and greatly threatened where available due to problems associated with climate change inefficient water management and pollution. recent report says very high percentage of the world population still lacks water for human well being and ecosystem conservation. the world is faced with the dilemma of achieving balance between economic development and sustainable natural environment. effective wastewater treatment has been earlier identified a way of protecting the water environment with detailed discussion on effective cheap and accessible method of wastewater treatment. various other methods of water purification such as forward and or reverse osmosis precipitations coagulation filtrations modular anaerobic system microbial fuel cell and advanced oxidation process with their attendant challenges have been reported in literature. various environmental policies stipulating discharge protocols exists. these policies are however not effectively executed as the industries consider them as damaging to business. the ability of industries to run with the various environmental discharge policies will sustain our natural environment. policy integration that is factoring environmental issues of concern into the core of economic development is highly important to facilitate policy performance. the main actors in environmental issues that is the industries agro firms and populace show very little understanding of the impact of their activities on the present and future environment. while organized periodical training concerning environmental sustainability should form part of environmental policy objectives ensuring that these objectives are integrated into sectors plains and policies is important. drinking water supplied to our communities is usually sourced from rivers springs and underground sources. usually some form of treatment is carried out to ensure the water is fit for drinking although some sources are somewhat free from contaminating microorganism and can be clean for example deep well. in many developing countries one source of water can serve many uses such as drinking washing swimming bathing etc. in the same vein sewage can be channeled into water bodies. sewage can be defined as used water draining out of homes and industries that contain a wide range of debris chemicals and microorganisms. such water is regarded as potential health hazard to consumers or the users of other sort. a major kind of hazard is the presence of pathogenic organisms in such water. this is why water is usually treated in three phases. the first is to separate large matter in the water source and the second stage focuses on removing more toxic substances and other matter. the tertiary phase involves total purification of water commonly by chemical disinfection. more recently membrane bioreactors are being used and have been found to be very efficient in removing contaminants. these are combinations of communities and high efficiency membranes that are much more effective at removing contaminants. the role of microbes is obvious in the second stage where microorganisms actively carry out biodegradation of organic matter in the aqueous portion produced after the first stage. biodegradation of materials such as paper and petroleum are by bacteria algae and protozoa. when water is exposed to air soil as well as effluents it gains saprobic microorganisms it can also pick up pathogens such as cryptosporidium campylobacter salmonella shigella etc. to monitor water for each of these pathogens may not be possible but detection of fecal contamination is an easier way of spotting contamination. in such case when the fecal contamination is high pathogens are believed to be present and the water is unsafe for drinking. hence indicator organisms are used as tools to detect fecal contamination of water. they usually inhabit the intestine of mammals and birds and can be easily identified using common laboratory procedures. to achieve water protection it will be almost impossible to search for the pathogens themselves. hence certain organisms with specified criteria are used as indicators of the presence of enteric pathogens in a water sample. an indicator bacterium should be applicable for analysis of all types of water it should be found anytime enteric pathogens are present and it should thrive in the wastewater longer than the toughest enteric pathogen. in addition such organism should not reproduce in the contaminated water because this will give exaggerated values and it should not be harmful to human begins. other criteria are that the level of contamination should be directly proportional to the level of fecal contamination assay procedure for the indicator organism should be highly specific and the test procedure should be easily performed. the following are commonly used as indicators of fecal contamination in water total coliforms escherichia coli fecal coliforms fecal streptococci enterococci coliphage and clostridium perfringens. coliforms are members of the family enterobacteriaceae. they are facultative anaerobic gram negative nonsporing rod shaped bacteria that ferment lactose with gas formation within hours at. microbial contamination of water can be detected by checking for certain organisms including heterotrophic bacteria coliforms and escherichia coliin such samples. the work by kora et al. showed that heterotrophic bacteria were in abundance in the lake water sampled. they also reported that contamination by e. coliand coliforms were beyond the allowable limit indiscriminate disposal of sewage into water as well as release of human excreta was implicated in the high level of indicator organisms. control of pathogens in water is important to prevent waterborne diseases this can be effectively done using multiple barrier approach. microbial treatment methods goes further than traditional municipal wastewater treatment because it takes into consideration the removal of nutrients and easily degradable organic compounds as well as the possible presence of toxic compounds and variations in ph of the wastewater. a more advanced design is required in the bioreactor to be used. some parameters to be considered in designing a treatment system are biomass yield nutrient addition the supply of oxygen or other electron donor ph control as well as kinetics that is biological reaction rates. it is important to note at high concentration many compounds of interest are toxic to bacteria being used for treatment. also some dissolved organic and inorganic compounds may constitute inhibitors to biodegradation by the organism. biological treatment processes may not consist of the followinglagoon treatment activated sludge as well as fixed film bioreactors. the lagoon treatment is long detention time basins but unlike activated sludge processes they do not use solid recycle. such treatment scheme may be in three categories anaerobic lagoon treatment which makes use of highly loaded lakes creating anaerobic conditions. it has been used successfully for the pretreatment of meat and poultry processing wastewater reducing the biochemical oxygen demand considerably. in the case of facultative ponds there is an aerobic surface and an anaerobic bottom. the top aerobic layer facilitates treatment of dissolved organic compounds as well as odourous compounds. this has found application in pulp and paper industries. with regards to aerated lagoons oxygen is provided by mechanical means or diffused aeration and the solids are continuously mixed and in suspension. biological oxygen demand removal may range up to. another biological treatment process of interest is the activated sludge. it is made up of an aeration basin where aeration equipment provides both oxygen and adequate mixing of wastewater to maintain a uniformly mixed liquor suspended solids. the aeration basin is followed by a liquidsolid separation usually in a clarifier by gravity and finally the settled biomass is returned again to the activated sludge basin. examples of aeration basin configurations are plug flow systems single completely mixed basins and basins in series. the solid retention time is important in this treatment process. the solid retention time is the average time biomass is maintained in a biological treatment process reaction. generally srt control is temperature dependent and for a warmer climate srt should be between and days. the clarifier is very important in the performance of activated sludge processes. it ensures that efficient clarification and thickening of mixed liquor occurs. when the readily degradable soluble biochemical oxygen demand is high in wastewaters growth of filamentous bacteria is encouraged leading to poor sludge settlement. the use of powdered activated carbon has been discovered to enhance the efficiency of activated sludge processes. the pac functions by adsorbing inhibitory chemicals or adsorbing chemicals that buffer variable loads. the application between and mg liter of wastewater has been proven to remove organic inhibitors of the process as well as improve nitrification since it absorbs organic compounds that can prevent this process in autotrophic bacteria. apart from the aforementioned anaerobic bioreactors are also beneficial for the industrial wastewater treatment. this is because it is cost effective and can be used for industrial wastewater with high strength. the processes in the anaerobic bioreactor lead to the production of mainly methane as well as other gases. however there is a need to strike a balance between fermentation bacterial activity and methanogenic bacteria activity as the latter is slow growing. advantages of anaerobic treatment include low sludge formation production of useful product low nutrient requirement and more importantly less energy requirements since aeration is not necessary. in addition to the energy production advantages of anaerobic wastewater treatment high organic matter removal efficiency low excess sludge production and stable operation are characteristics of this wastewater treatment technique. a most recent advancement in the biological treatment of wastewater is the use of membranes in bioreactors. in such cases the membrane can serve three major purposes. firstly membranes can be used as a surface for the attachment for growth of organisms and to permit oxygen to permeate into the biofilm. an example of this is the hollow fiber gas permeable membranes in wastewater treatment. such membrane is produced from microporous hydrophobic polypropylene and allows almost oxygen transfer while ensuring high biomass density within the space. the second way membranes can be used as selective barriers. such membranes permit organic compounds in wastewater to permeate but do not transport ions into the bioreactor. thus it allows for the selection of biodegradable organic compounds. an example of a material used for such membrane is silicone rubber. finally membranes can be for biomass separation. this third category requires that the membrane be used instead of a clarifier after activated sludge treatment. when such membranes are used the effluent produced is of high quality and less sludge. in addition automated processing can be easily employed. the disadvantage however is the financial enormity of the investment for initial start up as well as maintenance. since coliform bacteria are often detected in drinking water and often the source of contamination is not known it is important to put in place control measures. the water distribution systems must be considered because water quality deterioration may occur. this can be as a result of reduced maintenance of the distribution system or from insufficient treatment and may lead to undue microbial growth which the consumer may not notice. water distribution systems should be periodically flushed to remove sediments deposits as well as the growth of microorganisms within the pipe. for areas where the flow rate is low and possibly of the water becoming stale is high a secondary disinfection using monochloramine and proper maintenance should be carried out in such as to prevent nitrification. another point is to avoid a break in the distribution system especially during construction repairs or installations and cross connections. the officers should also ensure that the level of treatment a water sample is given is in conformity with the quality of the source of water. also the sampling for laboratory analysis must also be taken into consideration and monitored thoroughly when aseptic techniques are compromised detection of coliforms may occur. even though reports of water diseases have been low and less serious in most developed countries it is still a major concern in some underdeveloped countries especially war ravaged countries. it is however important to operate a multibarrier approach which will ensure protection of the water source and also certify adequate treatment and distribution of water. it is however important that every occurrence of coliforms in drinking water be properly investigated so that if the contamination is as a result of operational deficiency this can be addressed and future occurrence is prevented thus safe guarding the health of the public. several modern methods of water purification have been well embraced in our society today. however some rural dwellers who may not be able to afford these modern treatment methods still have water pollution as a major challenge. furthermore the disinfection by products which remain after treatment is another reason why herbal attempts in water treatment should be encouraged. it is important to note that not many researchers apply their antimicrobial extract or fractions directly in water treatment. many groups stop at establishing the antimicrobial potential of their study plant whereas others go further to apply the extracts in water treatment. for instance a reported work used alcoholic aqueous and fresh juice extracts of ocimum sanctum and azadirachta indica and applied them in vitro against salmonella which was chosen as an indicator organism. the alcoholic extract gave the best result for well water whereas the aqueous extract was best for lake water. similarly inspired by the fact that tulsi neem and amla are used to treat microbial infection without any side effect another researcher compared the effectiveness of these three herbs in water purification using percentage of e. coliremoval to measure the effectiveness of each herb. a notable observation is the fact that a mixture of concentration of each herb is not as efficient as the synergistic combination of the three. an indirect application of herbs in water purification is their use in the synthesis of nanoparticles which are afterwards applied to remove contaminants from water. these extracts influence the surface properties of the nanoparticles thus dictating their unique properties owing to the obvious advantages of natural disinfection there is a need for more research into natural products for water purification. this will in no small way help rural dwellers to cheaply assess cheap clean water and so live a healthier lifestyle. all organisms including man need water for their survival. water resource managers had strongly depended on wastewater treatment in ensuring that the quality of water is sustained preserved and maintained for optimal use. by an estimated around billion people out of a total population of around billion will be living in areas of water stress. one of the major environmental issues affecting humanity is the increasing worldwide contamination of freshwater systems as a consequence of industrial and chemical compound materials being emptied into their pathways runways majorly in form of micro pollutants. according to schwarzenbach et al. most of these pollutants are present at low concentrations many of them however can raise significant toxicological concerns more importantly when such compounds are present as constituents of composite blends. numerous micro pollutants had been identified in literatures which are not vulnerable to current treatment and are subsequently transported to the aquatic environment. some of these include steroid hormones pesticides industrial chemicals pharmaceuticals and many other emerging materials. this consequently endangers both the aquatic and human life. it is therefore not surprising that freshwater pollution is a strong public menace which requires global concern. the next quotation properly situates the environmental risk humans are exposed to it is in the interest of all the world that climatic changes are understood and that the risks of irreversible damage to natural systems and the threats to the very survival of man be evaluated and allayed with the greatest urgency the above quotation were the statements of the president of the republic of the maldives his excellency maumoon abdul gayoom during the united nations general assembly held in in the united states of america as adapted from the. the meeting was centered on issues of environment and development. due to climate change effect both the thermal and hydrological phases of rivers are expected to vary. owning to these it is necessary to briefly discuss what climate change is as climate change has the potential of imposing additional pressures in some regions of the world. in other to get a good grasp of what climate change is it may be better to first define climate. climate is usually narrowly defined as the average weather or broadly as the statistical description in terms of the average and variability of relevant parameters or quantities of interest over a period of time ranging from days to millions of years. most often the parameters often used are temperature precipitation wind etc. climate can therefore be generally described as a state including statistical description of the climate system. climate change on the other hand often referred to as global warming is the rise in the average temperature on the earth s surface. it is well believed that the climate change event is as a consequence of human use of fossil fuels which consequently releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the air. these gases trap heat within the earth s atmosphere and can have a variety of effects ranging from rising sea levels to severe weather events. green et al. had submitted that global climate change can include natural and anthropogenic influences on terrestrial climate and the hydrologic cycle. most notable international scientific community had actualized the reality of climate change. some of these include the national aeronautics and space administration the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and the environmental protection agency of the united states to mention a few. these agencies further reiterated that climate change is a menace created from human activity to affect human. figure adapted from world health organization geneva report revealed that all the major activities of global climatic changes eventually bore its consequence on human in general and on human health in particular. inter relationship between various kinds of environmental change. adapted from who geneva report. however pressures and anxiety on the earth s climatic system are having impacts on the surface of the earth. apart from the rising surface temperatures the activities of increasing and frequent flooding and droughts and the changes in our natural water ecosystem are other areas of great concern in the continuous existence of man on earth. according to who geneva report climatic situation and activities affect human well being both directly and indirectly. the direct influence is through the physical effects of climatic extremes whereas the indirect means include the influence on the intensities or level of pollution in the air on the marine and freshwater systems that provide food and water as well as the pathogens that cause infectious diseases. for the purpose of this section we concentrate on the climatic activities with respect to water pollution. this will lead us to the next sub section. observational records and climate projections provide abundant evidence that freshwater resources are vulnerable and have the potential to be strongly impacted by climate change with wide ranging consequences for human societies and ecosystems excerpt from the executive summary of the technical paper of the ipcc edited by bates et al. human activity affects weather climate and the environment. while some of human activities are harmless others damage the environment. while the environment can absorb some abuse without long term effects much harmful human activity exceeds the environment s capacity to recover. water pollution is one of the inevitable human induced climate change issues that called for urgent remedial measures. water pollution will in no small measure affect or alter the basic water quality parameters comprising the micro pollutants physiochemical and biological parameters. probable and incessant changes in both rainfall and air temperature has the capacity to affect river flow thereby inducing chemical reaction kinetics as well as drop in the freshwater ecological quality. associated with such process are dilution of contaminants and water sediment loads which when ran into lakes will alter its natural features and affect its inhabitants. this form of water pollution or through man made toxic chemical or and by products addition may therefore generate some toxic and greenhouse gases which may subsequently contribute to global warming activities or more severe environmental threats. the greenhouse gases are the gaseous constituents of the atmosphere which can absorb and emit radiation at certain wavelengths within the spectrum of thermal infrared radiation emitted by the earth s surface the atmosphere itself and the clouds. the primary greenhouse gases in the earth s atmosphere include carbon dioxide nitrous oxide water vapor methane and ozone. the other ones identified from the kyoto protocol include hydrofluorocarbons perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride. some of these environmental threats include earth s temperature enhancement lowering of atmospheric air quality and killing of aquatic animals. consequently given the legacy of historic greenhouse gas emissions and the prospect of inevitable climate change one can not but commit significant financial and technical resources to remediating the effect through rigorous research efforts and sensitization activities more importantly to water pollution and water related issues. thus water resources managers are continuously and increasingly looking for information on the possible changes in hydrological regimes which may arise in the next few decades for likeable adaptation measure plan. an interesting challenge is that while incessant water pollution may bring about a change in climatic conditions through greenhouse effect and activities the climate too will in turn take its toll effect on the water system and environment. this is because the higher temperature generated from the greenhouse effect will eventually turn some part of the snowfall into rainfall causing an earlier snowmelt season. these effects will consequently alter the timing and volume of spring flood appreciably. the rise in sea level during this time will then cause saline water intrusion into groundwater aquifers close to the coast thereby reducing the available groundwater resources. this process will in no small measure affect humans as almost about of the world population depends on groundwater for their various activities. mitchelle et al. using physically hydrological and water temperature modeling framework had reported an increase in the seasonality of river discharge for about of the global land coverage for the projected and modeled data for years when compared with the years spanning. they also projected a rise in temperaturerevealing a projected global change into the future. other effects of climate change on the hydrological cycle include increasing atmospheric water vapor content changes in soil moisture and runoff and changing precipitation patterns. furthermore higher temperatures of freshwater and changes in extremes including floods and droughts can also intensify many forms of water pollution. the authors also showed that water fluctuation in quantity and quality has the potential of affecting food stability and availabilityleading to a reduction in food security to vulnerable poor farmers. almost of the entire population of the earth do not have adequate access to safe water while about suffer the effects of deplorable sanitary situations. schwarzenbach et al. had submitted that the increase in surface groundwater pollution will go a long way in affecting both the human and aquatic life systems. according to schwarzenbach et al. about of the earth s available and renewable freshwater are used for industrial domestic and agricultural purposes. however if this activities are not well managed water pollution may be inevitable with different kinds of pollutants. some of the water pollutants according to the authors include industrial chemicals biocides natural chemicals industrial products as well as consumer products. industrial manufactured nanomaterials had also been found to be a major water pollutant whose effects is on the increase in affecting aquatic ecosystem. according to lapworth et al. groundwater pollution mainly results from landfill leachate infiltration of contaminated water from agricultural land groundwater surface water reaction as well as seepage of sewer systems. while some of these pollutants like heavy metals are not degraded at all some others disintegrated very slowly and can be transported to hundreds of kilometers away from the source. the effects of their waterborne pollution however ranges from contamination of drinking water causing drinking water quality problems to emission of greenhouse gases resulting in climatic change challenges. some remediate climate change mitigation measures against water pollution can however be taken. some of these include carbon dioxide capture and storage planting of bio energy crops proper solid waste disposition afforestation or reforestation cropland managementboth for water and reduced tillage among other measures. scientific researches involving water pollution should be geared more toward ascertaining the physical underlying molecular mechanisms and factors rather than just the usual empirical comparison approach that is commonly used. the mechanisms involved if well understood will go a long way in properly situating ways of combating the water pollution challenges. this according to metz and ingold may be achieved by developing a structure that addresses both the problem dimension and sustainability dimension of assessing best instruments that regulate water pollution. a sustainable working policy on water pollution should not only be designed and enacted but also rigorously followed more importantly in the developing and underdeveloped countries where the menace of water pollution has not been effectively managed. bemelmans videc had presented a classification for effectively managing water pollution. these are regulation economic instruments and information. these bemelmans videc classifications according to metz would help in differentiating source directed measures from end of pipe measures in water quality regulation. while the source directed measures help in avoiding pollution before toxic and injurious chemical materials enter into waters the end of pipe measures concentrate on filtering pollution after its input into wastewater. furthermore usage and disposal approaches should be in place with the aim of minimizing the addition of critical pollutants into aquatic environment. in addition such system specific properties and reactivities should be well understood and quantified. this kind of processes will yield a significant framework for reliable coverage and evaluation of chemical compounds in complex macroscopic ecosystems. other alternative methods for removing pollutants from waters include ozonation and advanced oxidation process coagulation flocculation membrane bioreactor pac and attached growth treatment processes. refer to the work of for comprehensive reading on the methodology and activity of each process. it can therefore be concluded that whatever form of measure taken in inhibiting both surface and groundwater will not only advance our aquatic ecosystem but will also help man from further endangering his environment from the menace of climate change. since water forms a core of the existence of human and other living things its preservation and sustainable availability can not be overemphasized. the availability of clean water is greatly threatened by various human activities and of interest is pollution which in turn affects the ecosystem and causes various climatic changes. while various wastewater treatment methods are being explored by industries and various treatment plants untreated wastewater is still being discharged into the water bodies by some industries. thus effective environmental protection policies compliance drive will be of immense benefit to the environment and by extension to human. factoring these environmental protection policies into the goals and objectives of various actors involved in environmental deterioration will help policies performance. this will serve as a step forward in the direction of ameliorating water pollution. the author. licensee intechopen. this chapter is distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution. license which permits unrestricted use distribution and reproduction in any medium provided the original work is properly cited. help us write another book on this subject and reach those readerstotal chapter downloadscrossref citationslogin to your personal dashboard for more detailed statistics on your publications. edited by matja glavanby amy y. olsen angela smith and shawn larsonedited by ismail m. m. rahmanby seyed y. s. lisar rouhollah motafakkerazad mosharraf m. hossain and ismail m. m. rahmanwe are intechopen the worlds leading publisher of open access books. built by scientists for scientists. our readership spans scientists professors researchers librarians and students as well as business professionals. we share our knowledge and peer reveiwed research papers with libraries scientific and engineering societies and also work with corporate r d departments and government entities. headquartersintechopen limited princes gate court london sw qj united kingdomphone intechopen. all rights reserved. empty searchwater is a basic resource that guarantees the life of all living beings on the planet. however its scarcity and pollution cause millions of people to have poor access to this much needed asset. although there are water treatment processes such as drinking water treatment or desalination that facilitate its treatment use and consumption in areas with quality or supply problems it is first necessary to avoid its contamination. in this video we show you what are the main causes and effects of water pollution. humans are the main cause of water pollution which is triggered in many ways by the dumping of industrial waste due to temperature rise that cause the alteration of water by reducing the oxygen in its composition or due to deforestation which causes sediments and bacteria to appear under the soil and therefore contaminate groundwater. in the same way the pesticides used in agricultural fields filter through underground channels and reach the consumption networks and also as a result of accidental spillage of oil. what are the main consequences of water pollution firstly the disappearance of biodiversity and aquatic ecosystems. also humans are harmed by the alteration in the food chain and by contracting illnesses when drinking or using contaminated water. as you can see water pollution has a great impact in the environment. for all this we must ensure water availability its sustainable management and sanitation for all as reflected in the sixth of the sustainable development goals adopted by the united nations in the agenda. after reading this article lets see if you really understood what causes pollution in rivers and seas. what pollutes water and what doesn t discard the wrong options related posts... and stay informed with the latest news on innovation. en cumplimiento del reglamento ue de proteccin de datos y dems normativa vigente en materia de proteccin de datos se le informa de que sus datos de carcter personal sern tratados por acciona s. a. con los siguientes datos identificativos nif a direccin avenida de europa parque empresarial de la moraleja de alcobendas tel email protecciondedatos acciona. com con la finalidad de atender sus comentarios y gestionar sus consultas solicitudes reclamaciones o sugerencias as como el envo por medios electrnicos de informacin sobre nuestros servicios y productos a travs del correo electrnico de contacto. la base jurdica para el tratamiento de los datos es el consentimiento del usuario al comunicarse con nosotros. los datos se conservarn mientras se mantenga la relacin y no se solicite su supresin y en cualquier caso nunca durante un plazo superior a doce meses. en caso de que su peticin no sea dirigida a acciona sino a una entidad que forma parte del grupo acciona sta comunicar los datos a la sociedad del grupo que pueda atender su solicitud de servicio o informacin de forma ms eficiente. en este sentido la comunicacin de estos datos puede constituir una transferencia internacional por estar estas empresas ubicadas en pases fuera del territorio de la unin europea para poder atender las necesidades de comunicacin entre las personas que forman parte del grupo a nivel mundial.. la aceptacin de los trminos de la privacidad supone el consentimiento para la transferencia internacional de sus datos necesaria para la correcta tramitacin de su peticin. no estn previstas otras cesiones de datos salvo obligacin legal. el interesado puede ejercitar sus derechos de acceso rectificacin supresin portabilidad y la limitacin u oposicin ante acciona s. a. dirigindose por escrito al departamento de proteccin de datos sita en avenida de europa de alcobendas o mediante el envo de un correo electrnico en la siguiente direccin protecciondedatos acciona. com adjuntando en ambos casos copia del dni u otro documento identificativo. asimismo podr en cualquier momento retirar el consentimiento prestado dirigindose a la direccin arriba indicada as como reclamar ante la autoridad de control. para ms informacin ponemos a su disposicin la poltica de privacidad de la pgina. sustainability is understood as the development that meets the present needs without compromising the capacities of future generations ensuring the balance between economic growth environmental care and social welfare. in sustainability for all we promote the awareness and difussion of good practices that allow to combine economic and social development with the preservation of natural resources. about us you currently have javascript disabled in your web browser please enable javascript to view our website as intended. here are the instructions of how to enable javascript in your browser. figure b. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including water vapour carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide absorb heat energy and emit it in all directions keeping earth s surface and lower atmosphere warm. adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere enhances the effect making earth s surface and lower atmosphere even warmer. image based on a figure from us epa. the sun serves as the primary energy source for earth s climate. some of the incoming sunlight is reflected directly back into space especially by bright surfaces such as ice and clouds and the rest is absorbed by the surface and the atmosphere. much of this absorbed solar energy is re emitted as heat. the atmosphere in turn absorbs and re radiates heat some of which escapes to space. any disturbance to this balance of incoming and outgoing energy will affect the climate. for example small changes in the output of energy from the sun will affect this balance directly. if all heat energy emitted from the surface passed through the atmosphere directly into space earth s average surface temperature would be tens of degrees colder than today. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including water vapour carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide act to make the surface much warmer than this because they absorb and emit heat energy in all directions keeping earth s surface and lower atmosphere warm. without this greenhouse effect life as we know it could not have evolved on our planet. adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere makes it even more effective at preventing heat from escaping into space. when the energy leaving is less than the energy entering earth warms until a new balance is established. greenhouse gases emitted by human activities alter earth s energy balance and thus its climate. humans also affect climate by changing the nature of the land surfaces and through the emission of pollutants that affect the amount and type of particles in the atmosphere. scientists have determined that when all human and natural factors are considered earth s climate balance has been altered towards warming with the biggest contributor being increases in co. figure b. measurements of atmospheric co since from the mauna loa observatory in hawaii and from the south pole show a steady annual increase in atmospheric co concentration. the measurements are made at remote places like these because they are not greatly influenced by local processes so therefore they are representative of the background atmosphere. the small up and down saw tooth pattern reflects seasonal changes in the release and uptake of co by plants. source scripps co program the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide have increased significantly since the industrial revolution began. in the case of carbon dioxide the average concentration measured at the mauna loa observatory in hawaii has risen from parts per million in to more than ppm in. the same rates of increase have since been recorded at numerous other stations worldwide. since preindustrial times the atmospheric concentration of co has increased by over methane has increased by more than and nitrous oxide has increased by roughly. more than half of the increase in co has occurred since. increases in all three gases contribute to warming of earth with the increase in co playing the largest role. see page b to learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. figure b. co variations during the past years obtained from analysis of air trapped in an ice core extracted from antarctica show a sharp rise in atmospheric co starting in the late century. modern atmospheric measurements from mauna loa are superimposed in gray. source figure by eric wolff data from etheridge et al. macfarling meure et al. scripps co program. scientists have examined greenhouse gases in the context of the past. analysis of air trapped inside ice that has been accumulating over time in antarctica shows that the co concentration began to increase significantly in the century after staying in the range of to ppm for the previous years. ice core records extending back years show that during that time co concentrations remained within the range of to ppm throughout many ice age cycles learn about the ice ages and no concentration above ppm is seen in ice core records until the past years. measurements of the forms of carbon in the modern atmosphere show a clear fingerprint of the addition of old carbon coming from the combustion of fossil fuels. in addition it is known that human activities currently emit an estimated billion tonnes of carbon each year mostly by burning fossil fuels which is more than enough to explain the observed increase in concentration. these and other lines of evidence point conclusively to the fact that the elevated co concentration in our atmosphere is the result of human activities. figure b. earth s global average surface temperature has risen as shown in this plot of combined land and ocean measurements from to derived from three independent analyses of the available data sets. the top panel shows annual average values from the three analyses and the bottom panel shows decadal average values including the uncertainty range for the maroon dataset. the temperature changes are relative to the global average surface temperature averaged from. source based on ipcc ar data from the hadcrut dataset noaa climate. gov data from uk met office hadley centre us national aeronautics and space administration goddard institute for space studies and us national oceanic and atmospheric administration national centers for environmental information. estimating global average surface air temperature increase requires careful analysis of millions of measurements from around the world including from land stations ships and satellites. despite the many complications of synthesising such data multiple independent teams have concluded separately and unanimously that global average surface air temperature has risen by about c since. although the record shows several pauses and accelerations in the increasing trend each of the last four decades has been warmer than any other decade in the instrumental record since. going further back in time before accurate thermometers were widely available temperatures can be reconstructed using climate sensitive indicators proxies in materials such as tree rings ice cores and marine sediments. comparisons of the thermometer record with these proxy measurements suggest that the time since the early s has been the warmest year period in at least eight centuries and that global temperature is rising towards peak temperatures last seen to years ago in the warmest part of our current interglacial period. many other impacts associated with the warming trend have become evident in recent years. arctic summer sea ice cover has shrunk dramatically. the heat content of the ocean has increased. global average sea level has risen by approximately cm since due both to the expansion of warmer ocean water and to the addition of melt waters from glaciers and ice sheets on land. warming and precipitation changes are altering the geographical ranges of many plant and animal species and the timing of their life cycles. in addition to the effects on climate some of the excess co in the atmosphere is being taken up by the ocean changing its chemical composition. based just on the physics of the amount of energy that co absorbs and emits a doubling of atmospheric co concentration from pre industrial levels would by itself cause a global average temperature increase of about c. in the overall climate system however things are more complex warming leads to further effects that either amplify or diminish the initial warming. the most important feedbacks involve various forms of water. a warmer atmosphere generally contains more water vapour. water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas thus causing more warming its short lifetime in the atmosphere keeps its increase largely in step with warming. thus water vapour is treated as an amplifier and not a driver of climate change. higher temperatures in the polar regions melt sea ice and reduce seasonal snow cover exposing a darker ocean and land surface that can absorb more heat causing further warming. another important but uncertain feedback concerns changes in clouds. warming and increases in water vapour together may cause cloud cover to increase or decrease which can either amplify or dampen temperature change depending on the changes in the horizontal extent altitude and properties of clouds. the latest assessment of the science indicates that the overall net global effect of cloud changes is likely to be to amplify warming. the ocean moderates climate change. the ocean is a huge heat reservoir but it is difficult to heat its full depth because warm water tends to stay near the surface. the rate at which heat is transferred to the deep ocean is therefore slow it varies from year to year and from decade to decade and it helps to determine the pace of warming at the surface. observations of the sub surface ocean are limited prior to about but since then warming of the upper m is readily apparent and deeper warming is also clearly observed since about. surface temperatures and rainfall in most regions vary greatly from the global average because of geographical location in particular latitude and continental position. both the average values of temperature rainfall and their extremes are also strongly affected by local patterns of winds. estimating the effects of feedback processes the pace of the warming and regional climate change requires the use of mathematical models of the atmosphere ocean land and ice built upon established laws of physics and the latest understanding of the physical chemical and biological processes affecting climate and run on powerful computers. models vary in their projections of how much additional warming to expect but all such models agree that the overall net effect of feedbacks is to amplify warming. rigorous analysis of all data and lines of evidence shows that most of the observed global warming over the past years or so can not be explained by natural causes and instead requires a significant role for the influence of human activities. in order to discern the human influence on climate scientists must consider many natural variations that affect temperature precipitation and other aspects of climate from local to global scale on timescales from days to decades and longer. one natural variation is the el nio southern oscillation an irregular alternation between warming and cooling in the equatorial pacific ocean that causes significant year to year regional and global shifts in temperature and rainfall patterns. volcanic eruptions also alter climate in part increasing the amount of small particles in the stratosphere that reflect or absorb sunlight leading to a short term surface cooling lasting typically about two to three years. over hundreds of thousands of years slow recurring variations in earth s orbit around the sun which alter the distribution of solar energy received by earth have been enough to trigger the ice age cycles of the past years. fingerprinting is a powerful way of studying the causes of climate change. different influences on climate lead to different patterns seen in climate records. this becomes obvious when scientists probe beyond changes in the average temperature of the planet and look more closely at geographical and temporal patterns of climate change. for example an increase in the sun s energy output will lead to a very different pattern of temperature change compared to that induced by an increase in co concentration. observed atmospheric temperature changes show a fingerprint much closer to that of a long term co increase than to that of a fluctuating sun alone. scientists routinely test whether purely natural changes in the sun volcanic activity or internal climate variability could plausibly explain the patterns of change they have observed in many different aspects of the climate system. these analyses have shown that the observed climate changes of the past several decades can not be explained just by natural factors. figure b. the amount and rate of warming expected for the century depends on the total amount of greenhouse gases that humankind emits. models project the temperature increase for a business as usual emissions scenario and aggressive emission reductions falling close to zero years from now. black is the modelled estimate of past warming. each solid line represents the average of different model runs using the same emissions scenario and the shaded areas provide a measure of the spread between the temperature changes projected by the different models. all data are relative to a reference period of. source based on ipcc ar scientists have made major advances in the observations theory and modelling of earth s climate system and these advances have enabled them to project future climate change with increasing confidence. nevertheless several major issues make it impossible to give precise estimates of how global or regional temperature trends will evolve decade by decade into the future. firstly we can not predict how much co human activities will emit as this depends on factors such as how the global economy develops and how society s production and consumption of energy changes in the coming decades. secondly with current understanding of the complexities of how climate feedbacks operate there is a range of possible outcomes even for a particular scenario of co emissions. finally over timescales of a decade or so natural variability can modulate the effects of an underlying trend in temperature. taken together all model projections indicate that earth will continue to warm considerably more over the next few decades to centuries. if there were no technological or policy changes to reduce emission trends from their current trajectory then further globally averaged warming of. to. c in addition to that which has already occurred would be expected during the century. projecting what those ranges will mean for the climate experienced at any particular location is a challenging scientific problem but estimates are continuing to improve as regional and local scale models advance. share national geographic headquarters street nw washington dc careers newsroom privacy notice sustainability policy terms of service code of ethics contact usnational geographic society is a organization. national geographic society. all rights reserved. pollution is the introduction of harmful materials into the environment. these harmful materials are called pollutants. grades subjectsbiology ecology health earth science geographycontents imagespollution is the introduction of harmful materials into the environment. these harmful materials are called pollutants. pollutants can be natural such as volcanic ash. they can also be created by human activity such as trash or runoff produced by factories. pollutants damage the quality of air water and land. many things that are useful to people produce pollution. cars spew pollutants from their exhaust pipes. burning coal to create electricity pollutes the air. industries and homes generate garbage and sewage that can pollute the land and water. pesticideschemical poisons used to kill weeds and insectsseep into waterways and harm wildlife. all living thingsfrom one celled microbes to blue whalesdepend on earth s supply of air and water. when these resources are polluted all forms of life are threatened. pollution is a global problem. although urban areas are usually more polluted than the countryside pollution can spread to remote places where no people live. for example pesticides and other chemicals have been found in the antarctic ice sheet. in the middle of the northern pacific ocean a huge collection of microscopic plastic particles forms what is known as the great pacific garbage patch. air and water currents carry pollution. ocean currents and migrating fish carry marine pollutants far and wide. winds can pick up radioactive material accidentally released from a nuclear reactor and scatter it around the world. smoke from a factory in one country drifts into another country. in the past visitors to big bend national park in the u. s. state of texas could see kilometers across the vast landscape. now coal burning power plants in texas and the neighboring state of chihuahua mexico have spewed so much pollution into the air that visitors to big bend can sometimes see only kilometers. the three major types of pollution are air pollution water pollution and land pollution. air pollutionsometimes air pollution is visible. a person can see dark smoke pour from the exhaust pipes of large trucks or factories for example. more often however air pollution is invisible. polluted air can be dangerous even if the pollutants are invisible. it can make people s eyes burn and make them have difficulty breathing. it can also increase the risk of lung cancer. sometimes air pollution kills quickly. in an accident at a pesticide plant in bhopal india released a deadly gas into the air. at least people died within days. hundreds of thousands more were permanently injured. natural disasters can also cause air pollution to increase quickly. when volcanoes erupt they eject volcanic ash and gases into the atmosphere. volcanic ash can discolor the sky for months. after the eruption of the indonesian volcano of krakatoa in ash darkened the sky around the world. the dimmer sky caused fewer crops to be harvested as far away as europe and north america. for years meteorologists tracked what was known as the equatorial smoke stream. in fact this smoke stream was a jet stream a wind high in earth s atmosphere that krakatoa s air pollution made visible. volcanic gases such as sulfur dioxide can kill nearby residents and make the soil infertile for years. mount vesuvius a volcano in italy famously erupted in killing hundreds of residents of the nearby towns of pompeii and herculaneum. most victims of vesuvius were not killed by lava or landslides caused by the eruption. they were choked or asphyxiated by deadly volcanic gases. in a toxic cloud developed over lake nyos cameroon. lake nyos sits in the crater of a volcano. though the volcano did not erupt it did eject volcanic gases into the lake. the heated gases passed through the water of the lake and collected as a cloud that descended the slopes of the volcano and into nearby valleys. as the toxic cloud moved across the landscape it killed birds and other organisms in their natural habitat. this air pollution also killed thousands of cattle and as many as people. most air pollution is not natural however. it comes from burning fossil fuelscoal oil and natural gas. when gasoline is burned to power cars and trucks it produces carbon monoxide a colorless odorless gas. the gas is harmful in high concentrations or amounts. city traffic produces highly concentrated carbon monoxide. cars and factories produce other common pollutants including nitrogen oxide sulfur dioxide and hydrocarbons. these chemicals react with sunlight to produce smog a thick fog or haze of air pollution. the smog is so thick in linfen china that people can seldom see the sun. smog can be brown or grayish blue depending on which pollutants are in it. smog makes breathing difficult especially for children and older adults. some cities that suffer from extreme smog issue air pollution warnings. the government of hong kong for example will warn people not to go outside or engage in strenuous physical activity when smog is very thick. when air pollutants such as nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide mix with moisture they change into acids. they then fall back to earth as acid rain. wind often carries acid rain far from the pollution source. pollutants produced by factories and power plants in spain can fall as acid rain in norway. acid rain can kill all the trees in a forest. it can also devastate lakes streams and other waterways. when lakes become acidic fish can t survive. in sweden acid rain created thousands of dead lakes where fish no longer live. acid rain also wears away marble and other kinds of stone. it has erased the words on gravestones and damaged many historic buildings and monuments. the taj mahal in agra india was once gleaming white. years of exposure to acid rain has left it pale. governments have tried to prevent acid rain by limiting the amount of pollutants released into the air. in europe and north america they have had some success but acid rain remains a major problem in the developing world especially asia. greenhouse gases are another source of air pollution. greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane occur naturally in the atmosphere. in fact they are necessary for life on earth. they absorb sunlight reflected from earth preventing it from escaping into space. by trapping heat in the atmosphere they keep earth warm enough for people to live. this is called the greenhouse effect. but human activities such as burning fossil fuels and destroying forests have increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. this has increased the greenhouse effect and average temperatures across the globe are rising. the decade that began in the year was the warmest on record. this increase in worldwide average temperatures caused in part by human activity is called global warming. global warming is causing ice sheets and glaciers to melt. the melting ice is causing sea levels to rise at a rate of millimeters per year. the rising seas will eventually flood low lying coastal regions. entire nations such as the islands of maldives are threatened by this climate change. global warming also contributes to the phenomenon of ocean acidification. ocean acidification is the process of ocean waters absorbing more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. fewer organisms can survive in warmer less salty waters. the ocean food web is threatened as plants and animals such as coral fail to adapt to more acidic oceans. scientists have predicted that global warming will cause an increase in severe storms. it will also cause more droughts in some regions and more flooding in others. the change in average temperatures is already shrinking some habitats the regions where plants and animals naturally live. polar bears hunt seals from sea ice in the arctic. the melting ice is forcing polar bears to travel farther to find food and their numbers are shrinking. people and governments can respond quickly and effectively to reduce air pollution. chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons are a dangerous form of air pollution that governments worked to reduce in the s and s. cfcs are found in gases that cool refrigerators in foam products and in aerosol cans. cfcs damage the ozone layer a region in earth s upper atmosphere. the ozone layer protects earth by absorbing much of the sun s harmful ultraviolet radiation. when people are exposed to more ultraviolet radiation they are more likely to develop skin cancer eye diseases and other illnesses. in the s scientists noticed that the ozone layer over antarctica was thinning. this is often called the ozone hole. no one lives permanently in antarctica. but australia the home of more than million people lies at the edge of the hole. in the s the australian government began an effort to warn people of the dangers of too much sun. many countries including the united states now severely limit the production of cfcs. water pollutionsome polluted water looks muddy smells bad and has garbage floating in it. some polluted water looks clean but is filled with harmful chemicals you can t see or smell. polluted water is unsafe for drinking and swimming. some people who drink polluted water are exposed to hazardous chemicals that may make them sick years later. others consume bacteria and other tiny aquatic organisms that cause disease. the united nations estimates that children die every day from drinking dirty water. sometimes polluted water harms people indirectly. they get sick because the fish that live in polluted water are unsafe to eat. they have too many pollutants in their flesh. there are some natural sources of water pollution. oil and natural gas for example can leak into oceans and lakes from natural underground sources. these sites are called petroleum seeps. the world s largest petroleum seep is the coal oil point seep off the coast of the u. s. state of california. the coal oil point seep releases so much oil that tar balls wash up on nearby beaches. tar balls are small sticky pieces of pollution that eventually decompose in the ocean. human activity also contributes to water pollution. chemicals and oils from factories are sometimes dumped or seep into waterways. these chemicals are called runoff. chemicals in runoff can create a toxic environment for aquatic life. runoff can also help create a fertile environment for cyanobacteria also called blue green algae. cyanobacteria reproduce rapidly creating a harmful algal bloom. harmful algal blooms prevent organisms such as plants and fish from living in the ocean. they are associated with dead zones in the world s lakes and rivers places where little life exists below surface water. mining and drilling can also contribute to water pollution. acid mine drainage is a major contributor to pollution of rivers and streams near coal mines. acid helps miners remove coal from the surrounding rocks. the acid is washed into streams and rivers where it reacts with rocks and sand. it releases chemical sulfur from the rocks and sand creating a river rich in sulfuric acid. sulfuric acid is toxic to plants fish and other aquatic organisms. sulfuric acid is also toxic to people making rivers polluted by amd dangerous sources of water for drinking and hygiene. oil spills are another source of water pollution. in april the deepwater horizon oil rig exploded in the gulf of mexico causing oil to gush from the ocean floor. in the following months hundreds of millions of gallons of oil spewed into the gulf waters. the spill produced large plumes of oil under the sea and an oil slick on the surface as large as square kilometers. the oil slick coated wetlands in the u. s. states of louisiana and mississippi killing marsh plants and aquatic organisms such as crabs and fish. birds such as pelicans became coated in oil and were unable to fly or access food. more than million animals died as a result of the deepwater horizon oil spill. buried chemical waste can also pollute water supplies. for many years people disposed of chemical wastes carelessly not realizing its dangers. in the s people living in the love canal area in niagara falls new york suffered from extremely high rates of cancer and birth defects. it was discovered that a chemical waste dump had poisoned the area s water. in families living in love canal had to abandon their homes. if not disposed of properly radioactive waste from nuclear power plants can escape into the environment. radioactive waste can harm living things and pollute the water. sewage that has not been properly treated is a common source of water pollution. many cities around the world have poor sewage systems and sewage treatment plants. delhi the capital of india is home to more than million people. more than half the sewage and other waste produced in the city are dumped into the yamuna river. this pollution makes the river dangerous to use as a source of water for drinking or hygiene. it also reduces the river s fishery resulting in less food for the local community. a major source of water pollution is fertilizer used in agriculture. fertilizer is material added to soil to make plants grow larger and faster. fertilizers usually contain large amounts of the elements nitrogen and phosphorus which help plants grow. rainwater washes fertilizer into streams and lakes. there the nitrogen and phosphorus cause cyanobacteria to form harmful algal blooms. rain washes other pollutants into streams and lakes. it picks up animal waste from cattle ranches. cars drip oil onto the street and rain carries it into storm drains which lead to waterways such as rivers and seas. rain sometimes washes chemical pesticides off of plants and into streams. pesticides can also seep into groundwater the water beneath the surface of the earth. heat can pollute water. power plants for example produce a huge amount of heat. power plants are often located on rivers so they can use the water as a coolant. cool water circulates through the plant absorbing heat. the heated water is then returned to the river. aquatic creatures are sensitive to changes in temperature. some fish for example can only live in cold water. warmer river temperatures prevent fish eggs from hatching. warmer river water also contributes to harmful algal blooms. another type of water pollution is simple garbage. the citarum river in indonesia for example has so much garbage floating in it that you can not see the water. floating trash makes the river difficult to fish in. aquatic animals such as fish and turtles mistake trash such as plastic bags for food. plastic bags and twine can kill many ocean creatures. chemical pollutants in trash can also pollute the water making it toxic for fish and people who use the river as a source of drinking water. the fish that are caught in a polluted river often have high levels of chemical toxins in their flesh. people absorb these toxins as they eat the fish. garbage also fouls the ocean. many plastic bottles and other pieces of trash are thrown overboard from boats. the wind blows trash out to sea. ocean currents carry plastics and other floating trash to certain places on the globe where it can not escape. the largest of these areas called the great pacific garbage patch is in a remote part of the pacific ocean. according to some estimates this garbage patch is the size of texas. the trash is a threat to fish and seabirds which mistake the plastic for food. many of the plastics are covered with chemical pollutants. land pollutionmany of the same pollutants that foul the water also harm the land. mining sometimes leaves the soil contaminated with dangerous chemicals. pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural fields are blown by the wind. they can harm plants animals and sometimes people. some fruits and vegetables absorb the pesticides that help them grow. when people consume the fruits and vegetables the pesticides enter their bodies. some pesticides can cause cancer and other diseases. a pesticide called ddt was once commonly used to kill insects especially mosquitoes. in many parts of the world mosquitoes carry a disease called malaria which kills a million people every year. swiss chemist paul hermann muller was awarded the nobel prize for his understanding of how ddt can control insects and other pests. ddt is responsible for reducing malaria in places such as taiwan and sri lanka. in american biologist rachel carson wrote a book called silent spring which discussed the dangers of ddt. she argued that it could contribute to cancer in humans. she also explained how it was destroying bird eggs which caused the number of bald eagles brown pelicans and ospreys to drop. in the united states banned the use of ddt. many other countries also banned it. but ddt didn t disappear entirely. today many governments support the use of ddt because it remains the most effective way to combat malaria. trash is another form of land pollution. around the world paper cans glass jars plastic products and junked cars and appliances mar the landscape. litter makes it difficult for plants and other producers in the food web to create nutrients. animals can die if they mistakenly eat plastic. garbage often contains dangerous pollutants such as oils chemicals and ink. these pollutants can leech into the soil and harm plants animals and people. inefficient garbage collection systems contribute to land pollution. often the garbage is picked up and brought to a dump or landfill. garbage is buried in landfills. sometimes communities produce so much garbage that their landfills are filling up. they are running out of places to dump their trash. a massive landfill near quezon city philippines was the site of a land pollution tragedy in. hundreds of people lived on the slopes of the quezon city landfill. these people made their living from recycling and selling items found in the landfill. however the landfill was not secure. heavy rains caused a trash landslide killing people. sometimes landfills are not completely sealed off from the land around them. pollutants from the landfill leak into the earth in which they are buried. plants that grow in the earth may be contaminated and the herbivores that eat the plants also become contaminated. so do the predators that consume the herbivores. this process where a chemical builds up in each level of the food web is called bioaccumulation. pollutants leaked from landfills also leak into local groundwater supplies. there the aquatic food web can suffer from bioaccumulation of toxic chemicals. some communities do not have adequate garbage collection systems and trash lines the side of roads. in other places garbage washes up on beaches. kamilo beach in the u. s. state of hawaii is littered with plastic bags and bottles carried in by the tide. the trash is dangerous to ocean life and reduces economic activity in the area. tourism is hawaii s largest industry. polluted beaches discourage tourists from investing in the area s hotels restaurants and recreational activities. some cities incinerate or burn their garbage. incinerating trash gets rid of it but it can release dangerous heavy metals and chemicals into the air. so while trash incinerators can help with the problem of land pollution they sometimes add to the problem of air pollution. reducing pollutionaround the world people and governments are making efforts to combat pollution. recycling for instance is becoming more common. in recycling trash is processed so its useful materials can be used again. glass aluminum cans and many types of plastic can be melted and reused. paper can be broken down and turned into new paper. recycling reduces the amount of garbage that ends up in landfills incinerators and waterways. austria and switzerland have the highest recycling rates. these nations recycle between and percent of their garbage. the united states recycles about percent of its garbage. governments can combat pollution by passing laws that limit the amount and types of chemicals factories and agribusinesses are allowed to use. the smoke from coal burning power plants can be filtered. people and businesses that illegally dump pollutants into the land water and air can be fined for millions of dollars. some government programs such as the superfund program in the united states can force polluters to clean up the sites they polluted. international agreements can also reduce pollution. the kyoto protocol a united nations agreement to limit the emission of greenhouse gases has been signed by countries. the united states the world s second largest producer of greenhouse gases did not sign the agreement. other countries such as china the world s largest producer of greenhouse gases have not met their goals. still many gains have been made. in the cuyahoga river in the u. s. state of ohio was so clogged with oil and trash that it caught on fire. the fire helped spur the clean water act of. this law limited what pollutants could be released into water and set standards for how clean water should be. today the cuyahoga river is much cleaner. fish have returned to regions of the river where they once could not survive. but even as some rivers are becoming cleaner others are becoming more polluted. as countries around the world become wealthier some forms of pollution increase. countries with growing economies usually need more power plants which produce more pollutants. reducing pollution requires environmental political and economic leadership. developed nations must work to reduce and recycle their materials while developing nations must work to strengthen their economies without destroying the environment. developed and developing countries must work together toward the common goal of protecting the environment for future use. photograph by dennis finleylight pollutionlight pollution is the excess amount of light in the night sky. light pollution also called photopollution is almost always found in urban areas. light pollution can disrupt ecosystems by confusing the distinction between night and day. nocturnal animals those that are active at night may venture out during the day while diurnal animals which are active during daylight hours may remain active well into the night. feeding and sleep patterns may be confused. light pollution also indicates an excess use of energy. the dark sky movement is a campaign by people to reduce light pollution. this would reduce energy use allow ecosystems to function more normally and allow scientists and stargazers to observe the atmosphere. noise pollutionnoise pollution is the constant presence of loud disruptive noises in an area. usually noise pollution is caused by construction or nearby transportation facilities such as airports. noise pollution is unpleasant and can be dangerous. some songbirds such as robins are unable to communicate or find food in the presence of heavy noise pollution. the sound waves produced by some noise pollutants can disrupt the sonar used by marine animals to communicate or locate food. how long does it last different materials decompose at different rates. how long does it take for these common types of trash to break down indoor air pollutionthe air inside your house can be polluted. air and carpet cleaners insect sprays and cigarettes are all sources of indoor air pollution. to soak up. chemical compound that reacts with a base to form a salt. acids can corrode some natural materials. acids have ph levels lower than. flow of acid or acidic liquid from metal mines or coal mines. precipitation with high levels of nitric and sulfuric acids. acid rain can be manmade or occur naturally. to adjust to new surroundings or a new situation. suitable or good enough. container of liquid material under high pressure. when released through a small opening the liquid becomes a spray or foam. the strategy of applying profit making practices to the operation of farms and ranches. the art and science of cultivating land for growing crops or raising livestock. harmful chemicals in the atmosphere. diverse group of aquatic organisms the largest of which are seaweeds. silvery reflective metallic element with the symbol al. region at earths extreme south encompassed by the antarctic circle. having to do with water. to choke or suffocate. layers of gases surrounding a planet or other celestial body. single celled organisms found in every ecosystem on earth. to prohibit or not allow. narrow strip of land that lies along a body of water. process by which chemicals are absorbed by an organism either from exposure to a substance with the chemical or by consumption of food containing the chemical. scientist who studies living organisms. physical disorder present at birth and not developed later. type of aquatic bacteria that can photosynthesize light to create energy. also called cyanobacteria and pond scum. growth of abnormal cells in the body. city where a regions government is located. greenhouse gas produced by animals during respiration and used by plants during photosynthesis. carbon dioxide is also the byproduct of burning fossil fuels. colorless odorless and tasteless gas that is slightly less dense than air. it can be toxic to humans. cows and oxen. chemical compound mostly used in refrigerants and flame retardants. some cfcs have destructive effects on the ozone layer. to move around often in a pattern. federal law protecting water from pollution. gradual changes in all the interconnected weather elements on our planet. visible mass of tiny water droplets or ice crystals in earths atmosphere. dark solid fossil fuel mined from the earth. place in the pacific ocean off the coast of the u. s. state of california that naturally emits gases such as methane a seep field. edge of land along the sea or other large body of water. to fight. measure of the amount of a substance or grouping in a specific place. to use up. to poison or make hazardous. substance usually a liquid or gas that reduces the temperature of a system or piece of machinery. tiny ocean animal some of which secrete calcium carbonate to form reefs. bowl shaped depression formed by a volcanic eruption or impact of a meteorite. agricultural produce. steady predictable flow of fluid within a larger body of that fluid. type of aquatic bacteria that can photosynthesize light to create energy. also called blue green algae and pond scum. toxic chemical used as an insecticide but illegal for most uses in the u. s. since. body of water where fish or other aquatic organisms no longer live beneath the surface due to natural or manmade pollution. area of low oxygen in a body of water. years. to decay or break down. oil rig in the gulf of mexico that exploded in. to go from a higher to a lower place. to destroy. nations with low per capita income little infrastructure and a small middle class. to disapprove or encourage someone not to do something. to throw away or get rid of. dull or boring. to make a hole using a rotating digging tool. period of greatly reduced precipitation. our planet the third from the sun. the earth is the only place in the known universe that supports life. having to do with money. to get rid of or throw out. set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and flow of electric charge. conditions that surround and influence an organism or community. to explode or suddenly eject material. gases and particles expelled from an engine. to eject or force out. one or more buildings used for the manufacture of a product. nutrient rich chemical substance applied to soil to encourage plant growth. to punish usually by charging an economic penalty or fee. or the penalty or fee itself. industry or occupation of harvesting fish either in the wild or through aquaculture. overflow of a body of water onto land. clouds at ground level. material usually of plant or animal origin that living organisms use to obtain nutrients. all related food chains in an ecosystem. also called a food cycle. ecosystem filled with trees and underbrush. coal oil or natural gas. fossil fuels formed from the remains of ancient plants and animals. liquid mixture made from oil and used to run many motor vehicles. to create or begin. mass of ice that moves slowly over land. to shine brightly. increase in the average temperature of the earths air and oceans. system or order of a nation state or other political unit. stone marking a persons burial place often engraved with the persons name and dates of birth and death. area of the north pacific ocean where currents have trapped huge amounts of debris mostly plastics. phenomenon where gases allow sunlight to enter earths atmosphere but make it difficult for heat to escape. gas in the atmosphere such as carbon dioxide methane water vapor and ozone that absorbs solar heat reflected by the surface of the earth warming the atmosphere. water found in an aquifer. environment where an organism lives throughout the year or for shorter periods of time. damaging. rapid growth of algae bacteria or other plankton that can threaten an aquatic environment by reducing the amount of oxygen in the water blocking sunlight or releasing toxic chemicals. the gathering and collection of crops including both plants and animals. danger or risk. group of solid and liquid particles in the air that makes it difficult to see. chemical substance with a specific gravity of at least.. organism that eats mainly plants and other producers. chemical compound made entirely of the elements hydrogen and carbon. science and methods of keeping clean and healthy. thick layer of glacial ice that covers a large area of land. to burn up entirely. activity that produces goods and services. not able to perform a task well. unproductive or barren. dark liquid used for printing or artwork. to contribute time or money. unable to be seen. body of land surrounded by water. to distribute give away or sell. winds speeding through the upper atmosphere. island in indonesia site of major volcanic eruption in. also called krakatau. international agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. body of water surrounded by land. site where garbage is layered with dirt and other absorbing material to prevent contamination of the surrounding land or water. introduction of harmful materials into the surface environment. the geographic features of a region. the fall of rocks soil and other materials from a mountain hill or slope. molten rock or magma that erupts from volcanoes or fissures in the earths surface. public rule. carnivorous or bloodsucking worm. new york town and the site of a former toxic waste dump. organ in an animal that is necessary for breathing. infectious disease caused by a parasite carried by mosquitoes. to spoil or damage. type of metamorphic rock. having to do with the ocean. wetland area usually covered by a shallow layer of seawater or freshwater. very large or heavy. person who studies patterns and changes in earths atmosphere. chemical compound that is the basic ingredient of natural gas. tiny organism usually a bacterium. very small. to extract minerals from the earth. process of extracting ore from the earth. large structure representing an event idea or person. political unit made of people who share a common territory. an event occurring naturally that has large scale effects on the environment and people such as a volcano earthquake or hurricane. type of fossil fuel made up mostly of the gas methane. chemical element with the symbol n whose gas form is of the earths atmosphere. one of many chemical compounds made of different combinations of nitrogen and oxygen. one of five awards established by the swedish businessman alfred nobel in. nobel prizes are awarded in physics chemistry medicine literature and peace. substance an organism needs for energy growth and life. decrease in the oceans ph levels caused primarily by increased carbon dioxide. ocean acidification threatens corals and shellfish. fossil fuel formed from the remains of marine plants and animals. also known as petroleum or crude oil. complex series of machinery and systems used to drill for oil on land. smooth dark coating on the surface of a body of water caused by an oil spill or leak. accidental release of petroleum products into a body of water either by an oil tanker or an offshore oil rig. circular pattern usually located near the antarctic of thin atmospheric ozone which absorbs harmful ultraviolet sunlight. layer in the atmosphere containing the gas ozone which absorbs most of the suns ultraviolet radiation. small piece of material. swiss chemist and businessman. large marine bird with a big bill. constant or lasting forever. natural or manufactured substance used to kill organisms that threaten agriculture or are undesirable. pesticides can be fungicides insecticides herbicides or rodenticides fossil fuel formed from the remains of ancient organisms. also called crude oil. place where oil or natural gas from the earths interior leaks to the surface naturally. an unusual act or occurrence. chemical element with the symbol p. chemical material that can be easily shaped when heated to a high temperature. single upward flow of a fluid such as water or smoke. substance that harms health. chemical or other substance that harms a natural resource. introduction of harmful materials into the environment. industrial facility for the generation of electric energy. animal that hunts other animals for food. american biologist and author. having unstable atomic nuclei and emitting subatomic particles and radiation. liquid precipitation. to clean or process in order to make suitable for reuse. to lower or lessen. any area on earth with one or more common characteristics. regions are the basic units of geography. distant or far away. available supply of materials goods or services. resources can be natural or human. to use again. natural substance composed of solid mineral matter. overflow of fluid from a farm or industrial factory. small loose grains of disintegrated rocks. frozen ocean water. base level for measuring elevations. sea level is determined by measurements taken over a year cycle. to slowly flow through a border. not very often. liquid and solid waste material from homes and businesses. process of removing harmful pollutants and contaminants from water discarded by homes and businesses so the water is safe for most uses. nonfiction book by rachel carson that documented the consequences of a polluted environment especially the use of the pesticide ddt. type of air pollution common in manufacturing areas or areas with high traffic. gases given off by a burning substance. top layer of the earths surface where plants can grow. to eject or discharge violently. piece of rock. severe weather indicating a disturbed state of the atmosphere resulting from uplifted air. system to empty streets of excess rainwater. storm drains flow into local creeks rivers or seas. body of flowing water. energetic or requiring a lot of activity. chemical element with the symbol s. greenhouse gas that can cause acid rain. toxic chemical made of hydrogen sulfur and oxygen. federal program to clean up hazardous waste sites in the u. s. also called the comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act. to live. large white mausoleum complex in agra india built by shah jahan for his wife mumtaz. small sticky piece of tar emitted by a natural or manmade oil spill that floats in the ocean and often washes up on beaches. degree of hotness or coldness measured by a thermometer with a numerical scale. rise and fall of the oceans waters caused by the gravitational pull of the moon and sun. the industry of traveling for pleasure. poisonous. movement of many things often vehicles in a specific area. type of large plant with a thick trunk and branches. strong thread made from at least two strings twisted together often made of plastic. powerful light waves that are too short for humans to see but can penetrate earths atmosphere. ultraviolet is often shortened to uv. international organization that works for peace security and cooperation. developed densely populated area where most inhabitants have nonagricultural jobs. depression in the earth between hills. huge and spread out. able to be seen. fragments of lava less than millimeters across. gas such as water vapor or carbon dioxide that is released into the atmosphere by a volcano. an opening in the earths crust through which lava ash and gases erupt and also the cone built by eruptions. introduction of harmful materials into a body of water. body of water that serves as a route for transportation. area of land covered by shallow water or saturated by water. organisms living in a natural environment. movement of air caused by the uneven heating of the earth by the sun. imagesinteractiveswebsitesthe audio illustrations photos and videos are credited beneath the media asset except for promotional images which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. the rights holder for media is the person or group credited. diane boudreau melissa mcdaniel erin sprout andrew turgeon mary crooks national geographic society tim gunther illustrator jeannie evers emdash editing kara west nancy wynne caryl sue national geographic society dunn margery g... exploring your world the adventure of geography. washington d. c. national geographic society. aug. for information on user permissions please read our terms of service. if you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation please contact your teacher. they will best know the preferred format. when you reach out to them you will need the page title url and the date you accessed the resource. if a media asset is downloadable a download button appears in the corner of the media viewer. if no button appears you can not download or save the media. text on this page is printable and can be used according to our terms of service. any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. you can not download interactives. in the united nations general assembly adopted sustainable development goals designed to transform our world by. the sixth goal is to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. according to the united nations one in three people live without sanitation. a lack of sanitation and sanitary waste management systems can reduce a communitys access to clean water and lack of access to clean water can allow diseases to run rampant sometimes creating epidemics of water borne infectious agents. learning about how freshwater systems work in the wilderness rural communities and urban centers can help us better understand the challenges of providing clean water and sanitation to people around the world. humans impact the physical environment in many ways overpopulation pollution burning fossil fuels and deforestation. changes like these have triggered climate change soil erosion poor air quality and undrinkable water. these negative impacts can affect human behavior and can prompt mass migrations or battles over clean water. help your students understand the impact humans have on the physical environment with these classroom resources. plastic is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. some plastics we can reuse or recycleand many play important roles in areas like medicine and public safetybut other items such as straws are designed for only one use. in fact more than percent of plastic is used only once before it is thrown away where it lingers in the environment for a long long time. it often breaks down into smaller and smaller particles called microplastics which can be ingested by both animals and people. fortunately there are things we can do to helplike stop using plastic bags straws and bottles recycling when we can and disposing of waste properly. use these classroom resources to teach about ocean plastics and check back for more coming later this year for the purposes of regulation the united states environmental protection agency identifies two broad categories of pollution point source pollution and nonpoint source pollution. air pollution consists of chemicals or particles in the air that can harm the health of humans animals and plants. it also damages buildings. watch this brief video picture of practice that captures everyday classroom life and provides real life examples of how students learn and think about freshwater topics. in the united nations general assembly adopted sustainable development goals designed to transform our world by. the sixth goal is to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. according to the united nations one in three people live without sanitation. a lack of sanitation and sanitary waste management systems can reduce a communitys access to clean water and lack of access to clean water can allow diseases to run rampant sometimes creating epidemics of water borne infectious agents. learning about how freshwater systems work in the wilderness rural communities and urban centers can help us better understand the challenges of providing clean water and sanitation to people around the world. humans impact the physical environment in many ways overpopulation pollution burning fossil fuels and deforestation. changes like these have triggered climate change soil erosion poor air quality and undrinkable water. these negative impacts can affect human behavior and can prompt mass migrations or battles over clean water. help your students understand the impact humans have on the physical environment with these classroom resources. plastic is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. some plastics we can reuse or recycleand many play important roles in areas like medicine and public safetybut other items such as straws are designed for only one use. in fact more than percent of plastic is used only once before it is thrown away where it lingers in the environment for a long long time. it often breaks down into smaller and smaller particles called microplastics which can be ingested by both animals and people. fortunately there are things we can do to helplike stop using plastic bags straws and bottles recycling when we can and disposing of waste properly. use these classroom resources to teach about ocean plastics and check back for more coming later this year for the purposes of regulation the united states environmental protection agency identifies two broad categories of pollution point source pollution and nonpoint source pollution. air pollution consists of chemicals or particles in the air that can harm the health of humans animals and plants. it also damages buildings. watch this brief video picture of practice that captures everyday classroom life and provides real life examples of how students learn and think about freshwater topics. national geographic headquarters street nw washington dc careers newsroom privacy notice sustainability policy terms of service code of ethics contact usnational geographic society is a organization. national geographic society. all rights reserved. join our community of educators and receive the latest information on national geographics resources for you and your students. byalina bradford february pollution is the process of making land water air or other parts of the environment dirty and not safe or suitable to use. this can be done through the introduction of a contaminant into a natural environment but the contaminant doesnt need to be tangible. things as simple as light sound and temperature can be considered pollutants when introduced artificially into an environment. toxic pollution affects more than million people worldwide according to pure earth a non profit environmental organization. in some of the worlds worst polluted places babies are born with birth defects children have lost to iq points and life expectancy may be as low as years because of cancers and other diseases. read on to find out more about specific types of pollution. land can become polluted by household garbage and by industrial waste. in americans produced about million tons of solid waste according to the u. s. environmental protection agency. a little over half of the waste million tons was gathered in landfills. only about was recycled or composted. organic material was the largest component of the garbage generated the epa said. paper and paperboard accounted for more than food was and yard trimmings were. plastics comprised about of the solid waste while rubber leather and textiles made up. and metals. wood contributed to. of the garbage glass was. and other miscellaneous materials made up about. commercial or industrial waste is a significant portion of solid waste. according to the university of utah industries use million pounds of materials in order to provide the average american family with needed products for one year. much of it is classified as non hazardous such as construction material and medical waste. hazardous waste is any liquid solid or sludge waste that contain properties that are dangerous of potentially harmful to human health or the environment. industries generate hazardous waste from mining petroleum refining pesticide manufacturing and other chemical production. households generate hazardous waste as well including paints and solvents motor oil fluorescent lights aerosol cans and ammunition. water pollution happens when chemicals or dangerous foreign substances are introduced to water including chemicals sewage pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural runoff or metals like lead or mercury. according to the environmental protection agency of assessed stream miles of lakes and of bay and estuarine areas are not clean enough for fishing and swimming. the epa also states that the united states most common contaminants are bacteria mercury phosphorus and nitrogen. these come from the most common sources of contaminates that include agricultural runoff air deposition water diversions and channelization of streams. water pollution isnt just a problem for the united states. according to united nations million people do not have access to clean water and around. billion do not have access to adequate sanitation. adequate sanitation helps to keep sewage and other contaminants from entering the water supply. according to national oceanic and atmospheric administration of pollution in marine environment comes from the land through sources like runoff. water pollution can also severely affect marine life. for example sewage causes pathogens to grow while organic and inorganic compounds in water can change the composition of the precious resource. according to the epa low levels of dissolved oxygen in the water are also considered a pollutant. dissolved is caused by the decomposition of organic materials such as sewage introduced into the water. warming water can also be harmful. the artificial warming of water is called thermal pollution. it can happen when a factory or power plant that is using water to cool its operations ends up discharging hot water. this makes the water hold less oxygen which can kill fish and wildlife. the sudden change of temperature in the body of water can also kill fish. according to the university of georgia it is estimated that around half of the water withdrawn from water systems in the united states each year is used for cooling electric power plants. in nearly all cases of this water is returned to its source where it can raise the water temperature in an area immediately surrounding the water discharge pipe. depending on water flow the water temperature quickly returns to ambient temperatures that do not harm fish. donn dears former president of tsaugust a not for profit corporation organization focused on energy issues told live science. nutrient pollution also called eutrophication is another type of water pollution. it is when nutrients such as nitrogen are added into bodies of water. the nutrient works like fertilizer and makes algae grow at excessive rates according to noaa. the algae blocks light from other plants. the plants die and their decomposition leads to less oxygen in the water. less oxygen in the water kills aquatic animals. the air we breathe has a very exact chemical composition of it is made up of nitrogen oxygen water vapor and inert gases. air pollution occurs when things that arent normally there are added to the air. a common type of air pollution happens when people release particles into the air from burning fuels. this pollution looks like soot containing millions of tiny particles floating in the air. another common type of air pollution is dangerous gases such as sulfur dioxide carbon monoxide nitrogen oxides and chemical vapors. these can take part in further chemical reactions once they are in the atmosphere creating acid rain and smog. other sources of air pollution can come from within buildings such as secondhand smoke. finally air pollution can take the form of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide or sulfur dioxide which are warming the planet through the greenhouse effect. according to the epa the greenhouse effect is when gases absorb the infrared radiation that is released from the earth preventing the heat from escaping. this is a natural process that keeps our atmosphere warm. if too many gases are introduced into the atmosphere though more heat is trapped and this can make the planet artificially warm according to columbia university. air pollution kills more than million people each year according to a study published in the journal of environmental research letters. the effects of air pollution on human health can vary widely depending on the pollutant according to hugh sealy professor and director of the environmental and occupational health track at the department of public health and preventive medicine st. georges university st. georges grenada. if the pollutant is highly toxic the effects on health can be widespread and severe. for example the release of methyl isocyanate gas at union carbide plant in bhopal in killed over people and over suffered respiratory problems. an irritant may cause respiratory illnesses cardiovascular disease and increases in asthma. the very young the old and those with vulnerable immune systems are most at risk from air pollution. the air pollutant may be carcinogenic or biologically active or radioactive. other air pollutants like carbon dioxide have an indirect impact on human health through climate change sealy told live science. even though humans cant see or smell noise pollution it still affects the environment. noise pollution happens when the sound coming from planes industry or other sources reaches harmful levels. research has shown that there are direct links between noise and health including stress related illnesses high blood pressure speech interference hearing loss. for example a study bythe who noise environmental burden on disease working group found that noise pollution may contribute to hundreds of thousands of deaths per year by increasing the rates of coronary heart disease. under the clean air act the epa can regulate machine and plane noise. underwater noise pollution coming from ships has been shown to upset whales navigation systems and kill other species that depend on the natural underwater world. noise also makes wild species communicate louder which can shorten their lifespan. most people cant imagine living without the modern convenience of electric lights. for the natural world though lights have changed the way that days and nights work. some consequences of light pollution are turning on so many lights may not be necessary. research published by international journal of science and research estimates that over illumination wastes about million barrels of oil per day and lighting is responsible for one fourth of all energy consumption worldwide. additional resourcesstay up to date on the latest science news by signing up for our essentials newsletter. thank you for signing up to live science. you will receive a verification email shortly. there was a problem. please refresh the page and try again. live science is part of future us inc an international media group and leading digital publisher. visit our corporate site. future us inc. west street floor new york ny. select pagea lot of factors like industrialization inefficient garbage disposal littering etc could cause pollution. a number of factories are set up near water bodies for the ease of operation and the waste produced by such factories as bumped into the water bodies. it is extremely harmful if the water is consumed or used. pollution is the contamination of the environment and atmosphere where do we live and make it unable to live in a healthy way. we have provided below short and long essays on pollution in english for your knowledge and information. after going through the essays you will know what pollution is and what are its main causes how to stop pollution its prevention etc. these essays will be helpful in your school college assignments of essay writing speech giving or paragraph writing etc. pollution refers to the presence of contaminants in the natural environment. some of the examples of polluting substances are gases like carbon dioxide carbon monoxide etc solid pollutants like plastic sewage etc and chemicals like fertilizers as well as those produced as byproduct in factories transportation etc. the immediate effect of pollution is that it renders earth s natural resources unusable or in other words harmful to use as well as it also causes species depletion and ecological imbalance. it is very necessary to take essential precautionary and pro active measures to prevent any further damage that will happen due to pollution to earth and its inhabitants. introductionpollution today has become a global concern for the health of the environment as well as the flora and fauna on the planet. pollution has a widespread effect on the environment including the natural resources. it makes the natural elements polluted and harmful to use ultimately making the life on planet suffer. what is pollution when a polluting substance enters into our natural environment and contaminates it this process is called pollution. these pollutants are mostly formed due to several human activities mostly economical in nature. to state few examples carbon monoxide released by transportation vehicles pollute the air trail of oil left by big ocean liners pollute the ocean and makes water harmful for aquatic life. conclusionpollution is the immediate threat that the environment faces today and is also the most prominent one. the clock is ticking continuously and with every passing moment the damage to the environment is increasing. immediate action to preserve the environment against pollution is needed to be taken by the government and other stake holders. introductionin a lay man terms pollution occurs when something unwanted enters into your natural environment. the release of toxic gas on burning of plastic is pollution mixing of harmful chemicals with the soil when it is mixed with chemical fertilizers is pollution when the disposed waste from your house somehow reaches into the open environment it cause pollution. similarly there could be several other examples of pollution. as for now we will discuss below the types of pollution. types of pollutionthe five major types of pollution are given below air pollutionits main source is the burning of fossil fuels by the transportation vehicles and smoke emanated from the factories. water pollutionits main source is the runoff water from urban settlements agricultural fields and release of byproducts from factories. soil pollutionsoil pollution could be caused from several factors like improper disposal of waste use of harmful chemicals in agriculture industry etc. light pollutionlight pollution refers to more than required presence of light in a polluted area which is large enough to interfere with the natural environment. noise pollutionnoise pollution refers to the presence of excessive noise generated by human activities like road transport vehicles jet planes a busy market loudspeaker announcements etc. conclusionwhatever may be the type of pollution it always has a degrading effect on the environment and human health or else affects one or the other living species on earth. light pollution confuses roosting birds often causing fatal accidents. introductiontoday the very existence of human life on planet earth along with the life of other flora and fauna is threatened up to a large extent by the pollution. pollution affects everything essential for survival natural resources species health etc. what is pollutionwhen any external unwanted substance generated by a human activity enters into the environment it causes pollution. causes of pollution are always human induced and the natural cause of pollution is almost negligible. there are a number of human activities those cause pollution. tons of toxic waste generated as a byproduct in factories is left into the rivers and streams polluting them thousands of cubic meters of harmful gases are released by transportation vehicles polluting the air improperly disposed waste from urban settlements got strewn on land and water resulting in land as well as water pollution. now that we have got an idea on what is pollution we will move on to discussing some of the significant effects of pollution. effects of pollution on environmentpollution has a widespread effect on the environment as discussed below polluted airpollution contaminates the natural air making it harmful to breathe. for example toxic gases released by transportation vehicles mix with the air resulting in its pollution. when this air is inhaled by a human or animal it causes severe respiratory ailments. some species of animals and plants which are highly sensitive to such kind of pollution die. polluted water bodiesimproper disposal of waste generated by areas of human settlements cause this waste to reach our naturally occurring water bodies in form of runoff. the urban waste consists of several toxic compounds including plastic. this waste is non biodegradable and stays in water making it hazardous to consume. it also results in the depletion of aquatic species population which are highly sensitive to pollution. soil toxicitypollution cause due to agricultural activities like the use of chemical fertilizers result in toxicity of the soils. chemical fertilizers are made up of harmful chemical compounds which got mixed with the soil ultimately making it toxic. it affects the species of flora as well as fauna those depend on the purity of the soil for their survival. species depletionone of the most prominent effects of pollution on the environment is the depletion of species. when polluting substances get mixed with our natural resources it harms the living species in some way or the other. gaseous pollutants cause severe respiratory ailments and decrease the life expectancy of the fauna and flora as well. global warmingglobal warming is one of the main effects of pollution which leads to a number of environmental effects. gaseous pollutants like carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide released due to the burning of fossil fuels stays in the atmosphere resulting in greenhouse effect. green house effect on the other hand is responsible for a number of factors like unexpected climatic changes resulting in droughts famine etc depletion in aquatic species like coral reefs fishes etc. conclusionthe effect of pollution on the environment is far and wide. not only the pollution effects present but also threaten the future of several species if no concrete action to prevent pollution is taken. the rate at which the pollution is being damaged is way too more than it could be repaired. it might take centuries to reverse the damages that we have done to the environment that too it won t be an easy task and will require strict discipline and will to tackle pollution. introductionpollution refers to the presence of unwanted substances know as pollutants in the environment. pollution is an immediate threat to the environment and causes severe damage to it. lately the world is recognizing the need to deal with the pollution if the earth and its biodiversity are to be preserved. what is pollutionpollution occurs when an unwanted external compound mainly generated due to human activities enters into the environment. these compounds are referred to as the pollutants and cause severe damage to the environment. everything that constitutes the part of the environment that is the water bodies air flora and fauna are in some way or the other get affected by the pollution. moreover pollution also causes global effects like greenhouse gas effects global warming and acid rain. global warming refers to an increase in earth s average surface temperature and results in conditions like famine flood and drought. below we will discuss about the effects of pollution on major indian cities like delhi noida ghaziabad lucknow and varanasi. it must be known that an aqi between to is considered good to is considered as satisfactory to is considered as moderate to is considered as poor to is considered as very poor to is considered as severe and a value above is considered severe plus or emergency. pollution level in delhias per a survey done by the world health organization the national capital territory of delhi stands at the lowest position in terms of air quality index among other major cities around the world. in delhi children are the worst affected and as per a study nearly. million or of all children are suffering irreversible damages due to poor air quality. air quality index of delhi remains usually moderate during january to september months. however the aqi rapidly deteriorates during the onset of winter months from october to december. often during these months the aqi reaches to a hazardous level of plus. the particulate matter levels of pm. and pm particulate matters in delhi reach up the level of micrograms m. this is much above the safe limit which is mg m for pm. particles and mg m for pm particles. burning of the roots of paddy crop during the winter months in the adjoining states of punjab and haryana makes the situation worst in delhi by causing dense smoke. this method is traditionally called parali and is one of the prime constituents of pollution in delhi. pollution level in noidanoida also known as new okhla industrial development authority located in the western uttar pradesh bordering delhi is immediately behind the national capital in terms of poor air quality. incessant construction works in and around noida in addition to the heavy vehicular pollution and cold winter air causes a dense thick smog. the term smog is used for a mixture of smoke and fog suspended in the atmosphere. the air quality index of noida also gets very poor up to the level of during the winter months of october to december. the particulate matter level of this western up district is by and large at par with that of delhi often the two competing with each other for the highest concentration of particulate matters. pollution level in ghaziabadghaziabad often tops the list of north indian cities with worst air quality index and pollution. here also like delhi and noida the aqi goes past the hazardous level of plus mostly during the months of october to december. the main reason behind such a poor air quality index of ghaziabad is industrial pollution and waste burning. the city is flanked by the industries on the outskirts which results in a dense smoke emanating from the factories as well as from the transport vehicles plying to the industrial area. the pm level of ghaziabad reaches up to four times of permissible levels during october to december. sometimes this value is reached during the deepawali festival due to the incessant bursting of crackers and smoke emanated from them. pm particulate matter which has a permissible limit of microgram m often is recorded nearing around micrograms m in ghaziabad. pollution level in lucknowthe air quality index of the capital of uttar pradesh lucknow fluctuates between moderate and poor often crossing the plus mark. though the situation is definitely not as bad as delhi ncr nevertheless it still is alarming and requires concrete action. the worst air quality index of lucknow was recorded as in the first half of the november month. the quantity of suspended particulate matter has also increased significantly in lucknow s residential areas since the last decades. the air of lucknow is found to be consisting of very fine particulate matters pm. with concentration just below microgram m which is very highly hazardous indeed. pollution level in varanasithe ancient pilgrimage city of varanasi has always been in news for its everyday fluctuating population of tourists. being the parliamentary constituency of indian prime minister mr. narendra modi since it has become the centre of development with everyday construction works of some kind or the other. though the construction is good for the city s development point of view it is also causing some of the worst recorded downfalls in its air quality. aqi of varanasi in is ranked at the third position on the world health organization s list of fifteen most polluted cities in the world. the people of varanasi are facing respiratory ailments and other complications due to the ever continuing construction work. recorded air quality index of varanasi reaches up to which falls in the poor category. the level of particulate matter found in varanasi is pm. the value of which fluctuates within the range of microgram m to microgram m which is extremely unhealthy for sensitive groups and children. conclusionindia is home to some of the world s most polluted cities whose position remains almost uniform though sometimes shifting a place up or down. cities like delhi noida calcutta mumbai and varanasi all have obtained a position among the world s most polluted cities. there is an immediate need to tackle the situation with strong will and determination. it is the time when government people industries all should join hands to tackle the pollution and prevent the health and environmental hazards caused by it. more essays on pollution pollution essay air pollution water pollution soil pollution noise pollution land pollution thermal pollutionpollution slogans air pollution slogans water pollution slogans soil pollution slogans noise pollution slogansmore on plastic pollution essay on plastic bag essay on plastic pollution why plastic bags should be banned essay plastic pollution causes effects and solutions why plastic bags are harmful for health related information speech on pollutionparagraph on pollutionarticle on pollutionessay on swachh bharat abhiyanessay on environmentslogans on environmentessay on pollution due to urbanizationessay on pollution and its effectsessay on pollution due to festivalsessay on pollution due to firecrackersessay on environmental pollutionessay on vehicle pollutionshare rate an entrepreneur. masters in computer application and business administration. a passionate writer writing content for many years and regularly writing for indiacelebrating. com and other popular web portals. always believe in hard work where i am today is just because of hard work and passion to my work. i enjoy being busy all the time and respect a person who is disciplined and have respect for others. december august december november featuring of essayfind all please help us to improve contact us. copyright white planet technologies pvt. ltd. all rights reserved. by garima gunjan i have written an essay on pollution. here we get info on what is pollution and its types air water noise environment global warming and climate change. pollution is introducing something into the environment that is dirty unclean or has a harmful effect on the ecosystem. related essays in english pollution is a key issue that has been affecting our earth. although it is an issue that has been prevalent since ancient times in the century its harmful effect has been felt on a large scale. although the governments of different countries have taken several major steps to curb these effects there is still a long way to go. several natural processes and cycles get disturbed due to this. not only that many flora and fauna today either have gone extinct or are endangered. due to the rapid increase in the amount of pollution animals are losing their habitat at a rapid speed. pollution has affected several major cities across the globe. a majority of these polluted cities lie in india. some of the most polluted cities in the world are delhi kanpur bamenda moscow heze chernobyl beijing among others. although these cities have taken several steps to curb pollution they still have a long way to go. the air quality of these places is poor and there are cases of land and water pollution as well. now it s time that the administration of these cities prepares strategies to check these issues. related ten tips on writing a good essay basically there are four types of pollution let s discuss the types of pollution one by one india has seen an increase in the number of vehicles on its roads. these are responsible for transmitting harmful gases such as sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide. these gases are responsible for reducing the quantity of oxygen in the earth s atmosphere. they also cause several breathing problems respiratory diseases types of cancers etc. related essay on terrorism the shortage of potable water is a major repercussion of water pollution. people are forced to drink polluted water due to which they get diseases such as cholera diarrhea dysentery etc. this in turn results in the breeding of mosquitoes which is a cause of many diseases such as dengue. all these factors are responsible for making the soil toxic. apart from that noise from the bursting of crackers functioning of factories music played on loudspeakers especially during the festival season also contribute to noise pollution. if not controlled it can affect the functioning of the brain as well. often the day after the festival of diwali it is reported in the media how the bursting of crackers caused an increase in noise pollution in major cities of india. although these are the four major types of pollution lifestyle changes have caused several other types of pollution as well such as radioactive pollution light pollution among others. if a place ends up getting light in excess or in an unwanted amount then it contributes to light pollution. nowadays several urban areas are facing unwanted glares in excess amounts. this is due to the fact that most indian cities such as mumbai bangalore delhi chennai etc. have an active nightlife. we are living in the nuclear era. since a lot of countries are developing their own nuclear devices it has lead to an increase in the presence of radioactive substances in the atmosphere of the earth. this is known as radioactive pollution. handling and mining of radioactive substances testing minor accidents occurring in radioactive power plants are other major causes contributing to radioactive pollution. related essay on demonetization global warming is another name for climate change. the blanket of pollution that traps the heat around our planet is the main reason why global warming is increasing nowadays. as humans burn fossil fuels vehicles emit harmful gases jungles burn at alarming rates all these factors are the main reasons. once it enters the earth s atmosphere eventually spreading across the globe. as a result heat gets trapped around the earth for the next or years after it starts emitting again. the worst part is harmful gases such as carbon dioxide have increased at an alarming rate. due to this the upcoming generation will feel the effects of global warming for hundreds of years. related essay on global warming the authorities at the national and international levels have taken several steps to curb the pollution issue. some of these are as follows related essay on digital india in english under its banner the uno in had initiated united nations environment program in order to address the issue of pollution. it has issued several issues such as climate change ecosystem management environmental governance resource efficiency etc. it has lead to several successful treaties such as the montreal protocol to limit the emission of gases that were thinning the protective ozone layer minamata convention to limit the use of toxic mercury etc. unep sponsored solar loan programme where lakhs of people from different countries were provided with solar power panels. although the authorities of different cities are working hard to curb the pollution issue however it is the duty of citizens and common people also to contribute to this process. few of the important ways to curb all types of pollution are pollution is a problem that we need to solve at the earliest so that humans can live safely on this planet. it is important that we follow the suggested measures to curb this issue. its our responsibility to make our place a better place for living. in order to make the earth survive we have to stop polluting it. recommended read essay writing in englishessay writing in hinditips to score in english paperten tips on writing a good essaysimple tips and tricks to score well in examinationstips for developing confidencequick exam tips and trickstips and tricks career question and answerstips for success in your careerexam preparation tipsexam stress management tips for parentsanalytical paragraph writing format examples samplesreport writing format how to report writing examples topics samples and typesletter to editor class to topics sample and exampleinformal letter format topics examplesarticle writing format article writing topics and examplesclass writing skills classified advertisement writing examplesletter to editor class to topics sample and exampleleave application for marriage format sample and examplesstory writing for class to format topics examplesjob application with biodata format topics examplesleave application format for office school and sampleessay on the importance of computers in our lifeessay on importance of discipline for success in lifeessay on terrorismessay on skill india missionessay on renewable sources of energyessay on make in india projectessay on haritha haram programessay on corruptionten tips on writing a good essayessay on my aim in life to become an astronaut essay on the importance of educationessay on beti bachao beti padhaoessay on importance of sports and gamesessay on demonetizationessay on pollutionessay on water conservationessay on global warmingessay on diwali in englishessay on holi in englishessay on chandrayaan in englishessay on women empowerment in englishessay on child labour in englishessay on swachh bharat missioncontributions of drdo in indian defenceactive and passive voice definition rules exercise and example sentencescountable and uncountable nouns meaning definition difference and examplesdirect and indirect speech format rules exercise and examplesdeterminers definition types exercise and examplesall about tenses tenses examples types of tenses in english grammarenglish vocabulary for bank po exams synonyms mcq videosnoun definition types exercise with examples in hindi and englishwhat is a verb definition types of verbs exercise and verbs examples in hindi and englishwhat is a preposition definition types exercise and examples in hindi and englishmodals definition modals exercise list of modals with examplesclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questionsclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questions class english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questions class english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english lesson explanationclass lesson explanationall india entrance examsstate entrance examscommon entrance testupcoming entrance exams top entrance exams after entrance exams for jobs after graduationentrance exams for commerce studentsentrance exams after graduationlist of entrance exams for teaching jobsentrance exams for railways recruitmentlist of entrance exams after graduationlist of entrance exams conducted by iitstop mass communication entrance examslist of entrance exams for arts students after graduationentrance exam dates indian army entrance exams pollution comes from all types of sources with various consequences. pollution is harmful to the natural world and human health. if youre environmentally conscious understanding the pollution basics can help you to minimize your contribution to pollution. air pollution is any contamination of the atmosphere that disturbs the natural composition and chemistry of the air. this can be in the form of particulate matter such as dust or excessive gases like carbon dioxide or other vapors that cant be effectively removed through the natural cycles of the carbon cycle or the nitrogen cycle. some of the most excessive sources of air pollution include depending on the concentration of air pollutants several effects can be noticed. for example polluted air results in smog increase higher rain acidity crop depletion from inadequate oxygen and higher rates of asthma in the human population. some scientists believe that climate change is also related to increased air pollution. according to the world health organization each year million people worldwide die from air pollution. who states the annually death rate from ambient outdoor air pollution is. million people worldwide. the organizations statistics also reveal an annual death rate from exposure to household smoke from fuels and dirty cookstoves is. million people. of the worlds population who reports that live where air quality exceeds the limits of the who guidelines. water pollution means any contaminated water whether from chemical particulate or bacterial matter that degrades the waters quality and purity. water pollution can occur in oceans rivers lakes and underground reservoirs. the pollution spreads from different water sources flowing together through the natural water cycle. causes of water pollution include the effects of water pollution include decreasing the quantity of drinkable water available lowering water supplies for crop irrigation and impacting fish and wildlife populations that require water of a certain purity for survival. one of the worst water contaminants is untreated wastewater from municipalities and industries. this type of pollution leaches into the soil and water. the united nations educational scientific and cultural organization reports on municipal and industrial wastewater contamination to world water supplies in various countries. for example in europe of municipal and industrial wastewater is treated but in latin america counties that figure is only. middle east and north africa statistics fall around whereas asia and the pacific region is between and. untreated wastewater is simply released and pollutes land water coastal ecosystems. its estimated that water from u. s. major rivers is used and reused more than times before it finally reaches the ocean. nineteen percent of u. s. households are connected to septic tanks for treatment and disposal of wastewater. the un statistics revealed. of the u. s. population was connected to wastewater treatment. soil or land pollution is soil contamination that prevents the natural growth and balance of the land. pollution can be present in land used for cultivation habitation or as a wildlife preserve. some soil pollution is deliberate such as the creation of landfills. however much of soil land pollution is accidental and can have widespread effects. soil pollution sources include soil contamination can lead to poor growth and reduced crop yields. wildlife habitats can be destroyed. water and visual pollution are often the result of soil pollution. other results include soil erosion and desertification. according to the conservation institute soil pollution is attributed to deforestation and soil erosion agricultural chemicals industrialization mining landfills and human sewage. the loss of topsoil is attributed to fertilizers and the use of pesticides in farming practices. these chemicals create a breeding ground for harmful and devastating fungi that lead to land erosion. noise pollution refers to undesirable levels of noises caused by human activity that disrupt the standard of living in the affected area. noise pollution can come from some noise pollution may be temporary while other sources are more permanent. effects may include hearing loss wildlife disturbances and a general degradation of lifestyle. early childhood development and education can be impaired from noise. the who reports that studies and statistics on children exposed to chronic aircraft noise suffer from impaired cognitive performance well being and moderate evidence of blood pressure and catecholamine hormone secretions are effected. the who reports environmental noise and its effect on human health. in the eu road traffic noise exceeds db with of the eu population exposed. suffer from exposure to more than db levels. more than are exposed to nighttime noise levels of more than db. the acoustical society of america reports that in only to americans were exposed to noise created by vehicles. that percentage in was.. radioactive pollution is rare but extremely detrimental and even deadly when it occurs. because of its intensity and the difficulty of reversing damage there are strict government regulations to control radioactive pollution. sources of radioactive contamination include radiation pollution can cause birth defects cancer sterilization and other health problems for human and wildlife populations. it can also sterilize the soil and contribute to water and air pollution. according to the u. s. nuclear regulatory commission of radioactive pollution is the result of natural sources while comes from anthropogenic sources. thermal pollution is excess heat that creates undesirable effects over long periods of time. the earth has a natural thermal cycle but excessive temperature increases can be considered a rare type of pollution with long term effects. many types of thermal pollution are confined to areas near their source but multiple sources can have wider impacts over a greater geographic area. thermal pollution may be caused by when temperatures increase mild climatic changes may be observed. swift changes make wildlife populations vulnerable and they may be unable to recover. thermal pollution can be seen as a result of various manufacturers. for example illinois state water survey reports the highest heat emissions worldwide are found in the mississippi river generated by coal burning power plants. the most polluted basin in the world from thermal pollution is found in europe the rhine river. light pollution is the over illumination of an area that is considered obtrusive. light pollution isnt just found in cities. much of the modern world suffers from light pollution. sources include light pollution can interfere with the normal sleep cycle. if it is near residential areas light pollution can also degrade the quality of life for residents. light pollution makes it impossible to see stars therefore interfering with astronomical observation and personal enjoyment. the national institutes of health reveals a growing body of work that suggests light pollution may have long term ill effect on humans and wildlife. exposure to light photons that hit your retinas can disrupt the circadian rhythm of humans and animals. another effect of light pollution is the inability to see the night sky. this is troublesome to astronomers and anyone wishing to enjoy star gazing. in the new world atlas of artificial night sky brightness reported that of the world resides under light pollution. in fact of the populations of the united states and europe live under skies of light pollution. more than a third of the worlds population is unable to see the milky way. this breaks down to north americans and europeans never see the milky way. visual pollution is more than an aesthetic eyesore or undesirable unattractive views. it can lower the quality of life in certain areas and have an economic impact on property values as well as personal enjoyment. sources of visual pollution include while visual pollution has a few health or environmental effects is the pollution that can have detrimental affects. most of the effects impact those living near or in this type of pollution. visual pollution presents a hazard and alters the community identity. for example visual pollution can be distracting while driving a vehicle or operating equipment and can lead to traffic congestion. the european scientific journal published a study in june called visual pollution can have a deep degrading effect on urban and suburban community a study in few places of bengal india with special reference to unorganized billboards. the study concluded that developed countries recognized and were taking steps to reduce visual pollution. the researchers concluded that in developing countries garbage is a greater nuisance and health problem than it is a visual pollution issue. personal pollution is the contamination of ones body and lifestyle with detrimental actions. this may include according to the epa personal pollution includes all types of pharmaceuticals and personal care products. the human and veterinarian products create trace environmental pollutants found in both surface waters and ground waters. personal pollution gained its own category but no studies have been made directly assessing personal pollution. however there are studies on various types of personal pollution such as turf fertilizers found in epa reports on nutrient pollution another type of pollution not commonly reported. the epa reports nutrient pollution is a challenge since it is a big problem that is spread throughout the u. s. excessive phosphorous and nitrogen discharged into the water and air is largely blamed on personal pollution or human activities such as fertilizers sewage discharge from treatment plants animal manure runoff pet waste and more. row crop runoff and animal feeding operations are a major cause. intertwined with other forms of pollution such as its carriers of air and water and personal pollution nutrient pollution impacts all of these areas as well as human health. water charged with nutrient pollution can generate algae that overcomes the water systems. shellfish aquatic and marine life suffer when they absorb the toxins created by algae blooms. eating contaminated shellfish or drinking water from this source can make a person very ill and in extreme cases lead to death. the mississippi river basin runs through states before it empties into the gulf of mexico. nutrient pollution effects this ecosystem. the epa reports in the united states littering is a form of pollution that can fall into several other types of pollutions such as personal visual water and soil. any type of waste or trash carelessly discarded without proper disposal is the definition of littering. this can include anything from fast food containers bottles paper and plastic packaging sales receipts electronic waste etc. the type of litter often determines the effect it has on the environment. for example some litter contains harmful chemicals that can find their way into water and soil. plastics can harm wildlife that either get trapped in plastic bags and die or marine life that consumes small pieces of broken down plastic. the leading national nonprofit keep america beautiful reports statistics on the types of litter in the united states. these figures show less litter in residential neighborhoods than along the roads. when it comes to convenience stores and commercial areas the surrounding roadways have more litter. keep america beautiful report on percentages of roadside litter and sources all types of pollution are interconnected. for example light pollution requires energy to be made which means the electric plant needs to burn more fossil fuels to supply the electricity. those fossil fuels can contribute to air pollution which returns to the earth as acid rain and increases water pollution. the cycle of pollution can go on indefinitely but once you understand the different pollution types how they are created and the effects they can have you can make personal lifestyle changes to combat poor conditions for yourself and others around you. air purifiers and humidifiers have different functions. air purifiers are clean indoor air but do nothing for indoor humidity levels. they remove dust and smoke from the air as well as allergenic substances like animal dander and pollen. humidifiers add water into the air but do not clean it. air purifiers and humidifiers have different functions. air purifiers are clean indoor air but do nothing for indoor humidity levels. they remove dust and smoke from the air as well as allergenic substances like animal dander and pollen. humidifiers add water into the air but do not clean it. they are used to relieve health issues from dry air and help reduce static electricity in the home. air purifiers remove particles and other pollutants from indoor air. there are two main types of air purifiers those that use mechanical filters to separate out particulate matter and those that use electrostatic methods to trap electrically charged particles. ionizers which produce negative ions create a negative charge on suspended particles which then settle out of the air and stick to the next surface they contact where they can be wiped up. some air purifiers were found to produce ozone which is implicated in producing inflammation of the respiratory system and worsening asthma symptoms. ultraviolet or uv air purifiers kill bacteria and other pathogens and are commonly used in hospitals and day care centers. uv light purification has also become available in residential hvac unitsmechanical air purifiers use filters to remove relatively large airborne pollutants such as dust and pet dander from the air. filters are often made from foam pleated paper or polyester or some other synthetic material. a high efficiency particulate air filter commonly known as hepa is capable of removing. percent of airborne particles. hepa filters can remove extremely small particles but can not remove odors. an air purifier may combine a hepa filter with a charcoal filter to help reduce odors. humidifiers add water to indoor air increasing the relative humidity of the indoor environment. dry winter air can cause chapped skin and contribute to respiratory problems. adding moisture to the air with a humidifier can reduce dry skin and decrease breathing problems including lessening coughs. adding humidity to indoor air can also reduce static electricity and prevent wooden furniture from cracking. four main types of humidifiers are ultrasonic impeller driven evaporative and steam vaporizers. ultrasonic and impeller humidifiers both produce a cool mist. ultrasonic models are quiet because they use ultrasonic waves to produce mist while impeller models use a rotating disk that can produce noise. evaporative humidifiers use a fan to evaporate water into the air and are also cold humidifiers. steam vaporizers create a warm mist by heating water with an electrical element. some models allow the mist to cool slightly before exiting the machine and are known as warm mist humidifiers. the standing water in humidifiers can become home to a wide variety of bacteria mold and fungi. when the humidifier is turned on these organisms can be released into your home s air and breathing them can cause lung problems and even infections. in the past disinfectants used with humidifiers have also created problems. minerals from the humidifier s water tank can be released into the air where they settle out as a fine white dust. humidifiers that use heat to evaporate water are prone to mineral build up on the heating element and the filters in evaporative humidifiers can also harbor bacteria and molds. you must keep humidifiers clean and you need to occasionally descale them to remove mineral build up. reviewed by tom iarocci m. d. karen s. garvin has been a professional writer since when dragon magazine published her first article. her recent work includes encyclopedia entries on historical subjects. she holds a bachelor s degree in communications and is pursuing a masters degree in european history. her interests include photography science history and steampunk. pollution refers to the addition of contaminating substances to the natural environment resulting in an adverse impact on the environment. pollution is human made and the level of pollution of the environment has increased with the rise in human population and developments made by the human civilization. pollution can be of different types depending on the part of the environment that is getting polluted or the type of pollutants contaminants causing the pollution. air water and soil pollution are the major types of pollution. however given the wide range of ways in which our species have managed to contaminate the environment we also have noise light radioactive thermal and plastic pollution. the different types of pollution have been discussed in greater details below. air pollution refers to the release of pollutants like toxic gases biological molecules and particulate matter into the atmosphere. the pollutants can be derived from several sources including both natural processes and human activity. volcanic eruptions limnic eruptions automobile and industrial effluents etc. are some examples of air pollution sources. carbon monoxide carbon dioxide chlorofluorocarbons aerosol sprays etc. are some examples of air pollutants. such pollution can be highly detrimental to the health and well being of all life forms on earth. in simple terms the contamination of water bodies likes lakes rivers ponds aquifers etc. by pollutants is called water pollution. like air pollution water pollution is one of the most harmful types of pollution. it can have extremely disastrous consequences for all living beings using the contaminated water. a major volume of the all the pollutants produced on land end up in water bodies. toxic wastes released by industries pathogens released in sewage harmful chemicals present in agricultural runoffs etc. are some of the top water pollutants. the contamination of water can lead to epidemics and even pandemics that can wipe out the population of an entire species or even more than one species. thus water pollution has a highly adverse impact on the environment society and economy of a place. when the soil of an area is contaminated it leads to soil pollution or land degradation. the soil is essential to the growth of all plants including crops. thus a degradation in the soil quality translates to lower yields and poor health of crops grown on such soil. industrial and agricultural chemicals are the common pollutants contaminating the soil. when the environment is filled with unnecessary or unpleasant sounds that are harmful to animals and plants it is called noise pollution. transport vehicles machinery industries loud music people yelling etc. are some of the most common sources of noise pollution. this type of pollution on the long term can give rise to chronic diseases like cardiovascular diseases. the psychological health of people can also be affected by noise. as the name suggests plastic pollution is caused by plastic accumulation in the environment. plastic a non biodegradable substance is extremely harmful to all life on earth. every year thousands of animals lose their lives due to plastic pollution. ingestion of plastics or entanglement in plastic objects kill these animals. most of the plastic waste generated in the world end up in the oceans where they cause great harm to the marine ecosystem. when radioactive substances are present in areas where their presence is undesirable or unintended it results in a type of pollution called radioactive contamination. such substances are highly toxic to all life on earth. radioactive substances trigger mutations in the genetic material of living organisms leading to different types of cancers. exposure to such toxins can also adversely impact the different systems of the body. death or disfiguration are common effects of exposure to radioactive waste. irresponsible management of such wastes or radioactive disasters are the common causes of radioactive contamination. the pollution of the night environment by anthropogenic light is known as light pollution. this type of pollution is caused by an excessive lighting of the streets flood lights used in stadiums lights used in an industrial area etc. the negative effects of light pollution include the spoilage of the aesthetic environment of a place creating disturbances in the ecosystem and also harming the health of living creatures. an induced change in the temperature of large volumes of water causes thermal pollution. this type of pollution leads to the degradation of water quality as the warm water does not provide ideal living conditions for aquatic flora and fauna. for example when water used as a coolant in power plants or that used in industries is released into a natural water body the warm or hot water mixes with the rest of the water to raise the overall temperature of the aquatic ecosystem. higher temperatures also alter the composition of dissolved elements in water. the flora and fauna living in the area that was earlier adapted to a particular temperature range can be killed by this abrupt change in the water temperature. thus aquatic life experiences a thermal shock due to thermal pollution. everyone loves to see clean and green spaces and beautiful vistas. when human activity installs ugly barriers to this vision of open and clutter free landscapes it is called visual pollution. the installation of billboards open storage of trash networks of electric wires crisscrossing each other above the street etc. create visual pollution. this type of pollution generates distraction eye fatigues diversity in opinions and other psychological problems. when waste products generated by humans is not disposed of properly it is called littering. here waste can include anything that is discarded by humans after use like bottles glass packaging material electronic waste metal waste etc. some of these pollutants like electronics batteries tires etc. are hazardous to the health of the environment. when chemicals from such wastes leach into the soil or enter the water bodies they cause soil contamination and water pollution. finally these chemicals enter the bodies of organisms to cause disease and death. all maps graphics flags photos and original descriptions worldatlas. comenvironmental pollution is currently the biggest challenge facing the word today. in the united states of rivers and of lakes are too polluted for fishing swimming and aquatic life. not surprising though when. trillion gallons of untreated storm water industrial waste and untreated sewage are being discharge annually into american waters. one third of the topsoil in the world is already degraded and with the current rate of soil degradation caused be improper agricultural and industrial practices and deforestation most of the world s topsoil could be gone within the next years. the great smog in killed people in london. this event was caused by a period of cold weather combined with windless conditions that formed a dense layer of airborne pollutants mostly from coal plants over the city. there are many sources of pollution and each one has its own effect on the environment and living organisms. this article will discuss the causes and effects of the different kinds of pollution. there are many causes of pollution including chemical pollution into bodies of water and soil through improper disposal practices and agricultural activities and noise and light pollution created by cities and urbanization as a result of population growth. air and noise pollution can have adverse effects on animals plants and humans. although air and water pollution has been improving over the last few decades they are still a large topic in the discussion today. there are two types of air pollutants primary and secondary. primary pollutants are emitted directly from their source while secondary pollutants are formed when primary pollutants react in the atmosphere. the burning of fossil fuels for transportation and electricity produces both primary and secondary pollutants and is one of the biggest sources of air pollution. the fumes from car exhausts contain dangerous gases and particulates including hydrocarbons nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide. these gases rise into the atmosphere and react with other atmospheric gases creating even more toxic gases. according to the earth institute the heavy use of fertilizer for agriculture is a major contributor of fine particulate air pollution with most of europe russia china and the united states being affected. the level of pollution caused by agricultural activities is thought to outweigh all other sources of fine particulate air pollution in these countries. ammonia is the primary air pollutant that comes from agricultural activities. ammonia enters the air as a gas from concentrated livestock waste and fields that are over fertilized. this gaseous ammonia then combines with other pollutants such as nitrogen oxides and sulfates created by vehicles and industrial processes to create aerosols. aerosols are tiny particles that can penetrate deep into the lungs and cause heart and pulmonary disease. other agricultural air pollutants include pesticides herbicides and fungicides. all of which also contribute to water pollution. nutrient pollution is caused by wastewater sewage and fertilizers. the high levels of nutrients in these sources end up in bodies of water and promote algae and weed growth which can make the water undrinkable and depleted oxygen causing aquatic organisms to die. pesticides and herbicides applied to crops and residential areas concentrate in the soil and are carried to the groundwater by rainwater and runoff. for these reasons anytime someone drills a well for water it must be checked for pollutants. industrial waste is one of the main causes of water pollution by creating primary and secondary pollutants including sulphur lead and mercury nitrates and phosphates and oil spills. in developing countries around of their solid waste is dumped directly into the ocean or sea. this causes serious problems including the harming and killing of sea creatures which ultimately affects humans. land pollution is the destruction of land as a result of human s activities and the misuse of land resources. this occurs when humans apply chemicals such as pesticides and herbicides to the soil dispose of waste improperly and irresponsibly exploit minerals through mining. soil is also polluted through leaking underground septic tanks sewage systems the leaching of harmful substances from landfill and direct discharge of waste water by industrial plants into rivers and oceans. rain and flooding can bring pollutants from other already polluted lands to soil at other locations. over farming and over grazing by agricultural activities causes the soil to lose its nutrient value and structure causing soil degradation another type of soil pollution. landfills can leach harmful substances into the soil and water ways and create very bad smells and breeding grounds for rodents that transmit diseases. noise is considered an environmental pollutant caused by household sources social events commercial and industrial activities and transportation. light pollution is caused by the prolonged and excessive use of artificial lights at night that can cause health problems in humans and disrupt natural cycles including wildlife activities. sources of light pollution include electronic billboards night sports grounds street and car lights city parks public places airports and residential areas. pollution affects the earth s land air and water by releasing pollutants in the air water and land. pollution ends up in these forms including dust smog and toxic gas emissions. in addition to the natural sources of pollution they can also come from human activity. these sources include industries such as mining manufacturing plants power plants oil refineries and transportation that release pollutants into the air or water. high levels of air pollution can cause an increased risk of heart attack wheezing coughing and breathing problems and irritation of the eyes nose and throat. air pollution can also cause worsening of existing heart problems asthma and other lung complications. like humans animals can suffer from a number of health problems due to air pollution including birth defects reproductive failure and diseases. air pollution causes a number of environmental effects in addition to the effects on humans and animals. acid rain contains high levels of nitric and sulfuric acids that are created by oxides and sulfur oxides released into the air by the burning of fossil fuels. acid rain damages trees and acidifies soils and water bodies making the water too acidic for fish and other aquatic life. nitrogen oxides released into the air by the burning of fossil fuels also contribute to the nitrogen responsible for toxic algae blooms. the release of man made compounds including hydrochlorofluorocarbons chlorofluorocarbons and halons formerly used as coolants foaming agents pesticides solvents aerosol propellants and fire extinguishers are depleting the ozone. the ozone layer in the stratosphere forms a protective layer that reflects harmful ultraviolet rays back into space that would otherwise destroy animal and plant life. water pollution is a serious threat to humans animals and aquatic life. the effects of water pollution depend on which chemicals are being dumped where. bodies of water that are near urbanized areas tend to be heavily polluted by dumbing of garbage and chemicals both legally and illegally by industrial plants health centers and individuals. by far the biggest consequence of water pollution is the death of aquatic creatures which can disrupt the entire food chain. pollutants such as cadmium mercury and lead are eaten by tiny aquatic organisms that are then eaten by fish and shell fish becoming more concentrated with each step up the food chain and causing serious problems in humans and wildlife. nutrient pollution can cause toxic algal blooms in drinking water sources that create toxins that kill fish and other aquatic animals. direct exposure to this toxic alga causes serious health problems in humans including neurological effects respiratory problems stomach and liver illness and rashes. a consequential problem is created when disinfectants used to treat drinking water reach water polluted with toxic algae they react creating dioxins. dioxins are extremely harmful chemical compounds that have been linked with reproductive and development problems and even cancer. nitrates caused by fertilizers also contaminate drinking water and according to the environmental protection agency babies who consume water that is high in nitrates can become seriously ill with blue baby syndrome which causes shortness of breath and blue tinted skin and can lead to death if not treated early. land and soil pollution has substantial consequences for humans animals microorganisms and aquatic life. contaminated land and soil can cause various problems on the skin respiratory problems and even different kinds of cancers. these toxic substances come into contact with the human body directly through eating fruits and vegetables that have been grown in polluted soils being consumed through drinking water that has been contaminated direct contact with the skin and breathing in air polluted with particles and dust. deforestation is the biggest concern when it comes to land degradation and soil erosion. clear cutting of vegetation and tree cover creates harsh conditions that destroy ecosystems and habitats. deforestation also creates an imbalance in atmospheric conditions reducing the amount of carbon that is naturally taken out of the atmosphere. this is a serious problem considering that most pollution created by people is carbon based. noise pollution can cause stress anxiety headaches irritability hearing loss and sleep loss resulting in decreased productivity. oil drills submarines and other vessels on and in the ocean can cause excessive noise that has resulted in the injury or death of marine animals especially whales. too much light causes eye strain and stress harming our eyes and decreasing our quality of life. light pollution also causes a decrease in the hormone melatonin that helps us to fall asleep resulting in restlessness and fatigue. many mammals insects birds and reptiles are photoperiodic meaning their movement mating growth and development and eating cycles are regulated by natural light patterns. light pollution can interfere with these natural behaviors and cycles causing a decrease in wildlife populations. pollution needs to be dramatically reduced because it is destroying the environment we live in contaminating our food and water causing diseases and cancers in humans and wildlife and destroying the air we breathe and the atmosphere that protects us from harmful ultra violet radiation. it is the responsibility of every living person to protect the environment and with the population ever increasing pollution problems are only going to get worse unless we do something about it. protecting the environment is a long and daunting task requiring continuous planning governmental policies and public and industrial participation. however the result of ignoring the problem will be catastrophic and life as we know it will begin to end. by decreasing waste implementing recycling policies banning dangerous agricultural chemicals and developing safe renewable energy we can significantly reduce the amount of pollution going into the environment annually and increase our quality of living. everyone is entitled to clean air to breathe water to drink and public lands to enjoy. if you have any ideas on how to reduce pollution please drop a comment and share your thoughts. recent postsecavo. com participates in the amazon services llc associates program. from time to time we may recommend a product for you to purchase for a specific purpose and will often link to amazon s website for you to easily complete that purchase. if you buy a product at amazon after clicking one of our links we may earn a commission. water bodies e. g. lake river ocean and ground water get contaminated due to discharge of pollutants in the water bodies without any treatment to remove harmful compounds. water pollution adversely affects not only aquatic plants and animals but it also affects human beings and ecosystems. water pollution is caused due to several reasons. here are the few major causes of water pollution sewage and waste water sewage garbage and liquid waste of households agricultural lands and factories are discharged into lakes and rivers. these wastes contain harmful chemicals and toxins which make the water poisonous for aquatic animals and plants. dumping dumping of solid wastes and litters in water bodies causes huge problems. litters include glass plastic aluminum styrofoam etc. different things take different amount of time to degrade in water. they affect aquatic plants and animals. industrial waste industrial waste contains pollutants like asbestos lead mercury and petrochemicals which are extremely harmful to both people and environment. industrial waste is discharged into lakes and rivers by using fresh water making the water contaminated. oil pollution sea water gets polluted due to oil spilled from ships and tankers while traveling. the spilled oil does not dissolve in water and forms a thick sludge polluting the water. acid rain acid rain is pollution of water caused by air pollution. when the acidic particles caused by air pollution in the atmosphere mix with water vapor it results in acid rain. global warming due to global warming there is an increase in water temperature. this increase in temperature results in death of aquatic plants and animals. this also results in bleaching of coral reefs in water. eutrophication eutrophication is an increased level of nutrients in water bodies. this results in bloom of algae in water. it also depletes the oxygen in water which negatively affects fish and other aquatic animal population. it is very important to prevent the polluting of water bodies and remove existing contaminants or reducing the concentration of these contaminants so as to make it fit for desired use. following are some of the ways of treating polluted water industrial treatment the raw sewage is needed to be treated correctly in a water treatment plant before it can be safely released into the environment. to reduce the amount and toxicity of waste it is passed through a number of chambers and chemical processes in water treatment plant. denitrification conversion of nitrates in gas is called denitrification. it is an ecological approach to prevent leaching of nitrates in soil. it stops ground water from getting contaminated. ozone waste water treatment ozone waste water treatment method is becoming very popular. in this method the pollutants in water are broken down by an ozone generator. ozone oxidizes bacteria molds organic material and other pollutants in water. septic tanks septic tanks are used to treat sewage at the place of location instead of treating it in any plant or sewage system. this system is used at the individual building level. the sewage is separated into solid and liquid components and treated separately. it s an old adage no water no life. we don t give much thought about using water cautiously even though it is the basis of our daily life. with the increasing scarcity of water everywhere it has become imperative to use water judiciously and conserve it as much as we can. with the lockdown being enforced about go in hyderabad the go is a government order that was issued in that followed the precautionary principle in order to protect the reservoirs mainly the drinking water requirement of hyderabad. the saddest part of the go is despite the protection of these lakes by the government the rapid urbanization and selfish attitude the nagpur municipal corporation is possible to make rainwater harvesting compulsory for all buildings occupied and driven by institutions. it is the first of its kind move proposed by the rainwater harvesting committee. a couple of days ago the committee carried a meeting at the nmc head office which was organized by mayor sandip while oil is one of the prime movers of the world economy the scarcity of water is likely to be one of the biggest challenges in the coming years. a large number of people including those in developing nations still do not have access to safe drinking water. the scarcity of pure drinking water is your details has been submitted successfully. the information provided herein have been collected from publicly available sources and is yet to be verified as per rera guidelines. read more.. the information sources used here include onsite interviews marketing material and other information sources on the internet. the information related to ownership of this property are also based on material gathered from public sources mentioned above or as has been declared to us by the owners person listing the property. these data have not yet been verified against authentic documents and are only indicative of the actual situation of this property project or land holding and their ownership. at commonfloor we provide this information to help our users find publicly available data in a structured format. we are in the process of connecting with the relevant owners and verifying the data as per the provisions of the real estate act. we will keep updating the information here regularly. while we believe that the information provided to you is correct on the basis of the data provided to us please consider this data and information as indicative and use your judgement and verify any information before making any decision. copyright commonfloor. com. all rights reserved. jump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. istockair pollution refers to the release of pollutants into the airpollutants which are detrimental to human health and the planet as a whole. according to the world health organization each year air pollution is responsible for nearly seven million deaths around the globe. nine out of ten human beings currently breathe air that exceeds the who s guideline limits for pollutants with those living in low and middle income countries suffering the most. in the united states the clean air act established in authorizes the u. s. environmental protection agency to safeguard public health by regulating the emissions of these harmful air pollutants. most air pollution comes from energy use and production says john walke director of the clean air project part of the climate and clean energy program at nrdc. burning fossil fuels releases gases and chemicals into the air. and in an especially destructive feedback loop air pollution not only contributes to climate change but is also exacerbated by it. air pollution in the form of carbon dioxide and methane raises the earth s temperature walke says. another type of air pollution smog is then worsened by that increased heat forming when the weather is warmer and there s more ultraviolet radiation. climate change also increases the production of allergenic air pollutants including mold and pollen. we ve made progress over the last years improving air quality in the united states thanks to the clean air act says kim knowlton senior scientist and deputy director of the nrdc science center. but climate change will make it harder in the future to meet pollution standards which are designed to protect health. the effects of air pollution on the human body vary depending on the type of pollutant and the length and level of exposureas well as other factors including a person s individual health risks and the cumulative impacts of multiple pollutants or stressors. these are the two most prevalent types of air pollution. smog occurs when emissions from combusting fossil fuels react with sunlight. soot is made up of tiny particles of chemicals soil smoke dust or allergensin the form of either gas or solidsthat are carried in the air. the sources of smog and soot are similar. both come from cars and trucks factories power plants incinerators engines generally anything that combusts fossil fuels such as coal gas or natural gas walke says. smog can irritate the eyes and throat and also damage the lungs especially those of children senior citizens and people who work or exercise outdoors. it s even worse for people who have asthma or allergies these extra pollutants can intensify their symptoms and trigger asthma attacks. the tiniest airborne particles in soot whether gaseous or solid are especially dangerous because they can penetrate the lungs and bloodstream and worsen bronchitis lead to heart attacks and even hasten death. in a report from harvard s t. h. chan school of public health showed covid mortality rates in areas with more soot pollution were higher than in areas with even slightly less showing a correlation between the virus s deadliness and long term exposure to fine particulate matter and illuminating an environmental justice issue. because highways and polluting facilities have historically been sited in or next to low income neighborhoods and communities of color the negative effects of this pollution have been disproportionately experienced by the people who live in these communities. in the union of concerned scientists found that soot exposure was percent higher for asian americans on average than for other americans. for black people the exposure rate was percent higher for latinos percent higher. a number of air pollutants pose severe health risks and can sometimes be fatal even in small amounts. almost of them are regulated by law some of the most common are mercury lead dioxins and benzene. these are also most often emitted during gas or coal combustion incinerating orin the case of benzenefound in gasoline walke says. benzene classified as a carcinogen by the epa can cause eye skin and lung irritation in the short term and blood disorders in the long term. dioxins more typically found in food but also present in small amounts in the air can affect the liver in the short term and harm the immune nervous and endocrine systems as well as reproductive functions. mercury attacks the central nervous system. in large amounts lead can damage children s brains and kidneys and even minimal exposure can affect children s iq and ability to learn. another category of toxic compounds polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are by products of traffic exhaust and wildfire smoke. in large amounts they have been linked to eye and lung irritation blood and liver issues and even cancer. in one study the children of mothers exposed to pahs during pregnancy showed slower brain processing speeds and more pronounced symptoms of adhd. by trapping the earth s heat in the atmosphere greenhouse gases lead to warmer temperatures which in turn lead to the hallmarks of climate change rising sea levels more extreme weather heat related deaths and the increased transmission of infectious diseases. in carbon dioxide accounted for percent of the country s total greenhouse gas emissions and methane made up percent. carbon dioxide comes from combusting fossil fuels and methane comes from natural and industrial sources including large amounts that are released during oil and gas drilling walke says. we emit far larger amounts of carbon dioxide but methane is significantly more potent so it s also very destructive. another class of greenhouse gases hydrofluorocarbons are thousands of times more powerful than carbon dioxide in their ability to trap heat. in october more than countries reached an agreement to reduce the use of these chemicalswhich are found in air conditioners and refrigeratorsand develop greener alternatives over time. though president trump was unwilling to sign on to this agreement a bipartisan group of senators overrode his objections in and set the united states on track to slash hfcs by percent by. according to david doniger senior strategic director of nrdc s climate and clean energy program the agreed to hfc phasedown will avoid the equivalent of more than billion tons of carbon dioxide over the next years. mold and allergens from trees weeds and grass are also carried in the air are exacerbated by climate change and can be hazardous to health. though they aren t regulated and are less directly connected to human actions they can be considered a form of air pollution. when homes schools or businesses get water damage mold can grow and can produce allergenic airborne pollutants knowlton says. mold exposure can precipitate asthma attacks or an allergic response and some molds can even produce toxins that would be dangerous for anyone to inhale. pollen allergies are worsening because of climate change. lab and field studies are showing that pollen producing plantsespecially ragweedgrow larger and produce more pollen when you increase the amount of carbon dioxide that they grow in knowlton says. climate change also extends the pollen production season and some studies are beginning to suggest that ragweed pollen itself might be becoming a more potent allergen. if so more people will suffer runny noses fevers itchy eyes and other symptoms. air pollution is now the world s fourth largest risk factor for early death. according to the most recent state of global air reportwhich summarizes the latest scientific understanding of air pollution around the world. million deaths were linked to outdoor air pollution exposures in and another. million deaths were caused by indoor air pollution. despite improvements in reducing global average mortality rates from air pollution the world s most populous countries india and china continue to bear the highest burdens of disease says vijay lamaye staff scientist at the nrdc science center. this report is a sobering reminder that the climate crisis threatens to worsen air pollution problems significantly if we fail to act to cut carbon pollution. a post shared by nrdc some four out of ten u. s. residents million peoplelive in counties with unhealthy levels of air pollution according to the state of the air report by the american lung association. since the annual report was first published in its findings have shown how the clean air act has been able to reduce harmful emissions from transportation power plants and manufacturing. recent findings however reflect how climate changefueled wildfires and extreme heat are adding to the challenges of protecting public health. the latest reportwhich focuses on ozone year round particle pollution and short term particle pollutionalso finds that people of color are percent more likely than white people to live in a county with a failing grade in at least one of those categories and three times more likely to live in a county that fails in all three. in rankings for each of the three pollution categories covered by the ala report california cities occupy the top three slots despite significant gains the golden state has made in the past half century. at the other end of the spectrum burlington vermont honolulu and wilmington north carolina consistently rank among the country s best cities for air quality. no one wants to live next door to an incinerator oil refinery port toxic waste dump or other polluting site. yet millions of people around the world do and this puts them at a much higher risk for respiratory disease cardiovascular disease neurological damage cancer and death. in the united states people of color are. times more likely than whites to live in areas with poor air quality according to the ala. historically racist zoning policies and the discriminatory lending practices known as redlining have combined to keep polluting industries and car choked highways away from white neighborhoods and have turned communities of colorespecially poor and working class communities of colorinto sacrifice zones where residents are forced to breathe dirty air and suffer the many health problems associated with it. in addition to the increased health risks that come from living in such places members of these communities experience economic harm in the form of missed workdays higher medical costs and local underinvestment. environmental racism isnt limited to cities and industrial areas. outdoor laborers including the estimated three million migrant and seasonal farmworkers in the united states are among the most vulnerable to air pollutionand also among the least equipped politically to pressure employers and lawmakers to affirm their right to breathe clean air. recently cumulative impact mapping which uses data on environmental conditions and demographics has been able to show how some communities are overburdened with layers of issues like high levels of poverty unemployment and pollution. tools like the environmental justice screening method and the epa s ejscreen provide evidence of what many environmental justice communities have been explaining for decades that we need land use and public health reforms to ensure that vulnerable areas are not overburdened and that the people who need resources most are receiving them. in the united states the clean air act has been a crucial tool for reducing air pollution since its passage in although fossil fuel interests aided by industry friendly lawmakers have frequently attempted to weaken its many protections. ensuring that this bedrock environmental law remains intact and properly enforced will always be key to maintaining and improving our air quality. but the best most effective way to control air pollution is to speed up our transition to cleaner fuels and industrial processes. by switching over to renewable energy sources maximizing fuel efficiency in our vehicles and replacing more and more of our gasoline powered cars and trucks with electric versions well be limiting air pollution at its source while also curbing the global warming that heightens so many of its worst health impacts. and what about the economic costs of controlling air pollution according to a report on the clean air act commissioned by nrdc the annual benefits of cleaner air are up to times greater than the cost of clean air regulations. those benefits include up to avoided premature deaths fewer hospital admissions for cardiac and respiratory illnesses and net economic benefits of up to. trillion for the u. s. economy every year. the less gasoline we burn the better we re doing to reduce air pollution and harmful effects of climate change walke says. make good choices about transportation. when you can walk ride a bike or take public transportation. for driving choose a car that gets better miles per gallon of gas or choose an electric car. you can also investigate your power provider optionsyou may be able to request that your electricity be supplied by wind or solar. buying your food locally cuts down on the fossil fuels burned in trucking or flying food in from across the country. and most important support leaders who push for clean air and water and responsible steps on climate change walke says. this story was originally published on november and has been updated with new information and links. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. to a college student who grew up surrounded by heavy truck traffic warehouses and commercial hubs in one of california s most polluted communities the push to electrify transportation is more than just urgent health policyit s personal. the global toll of premature deaths attributed to the burning of coal gasoline and diesel is breathtakingly high with new research doubling previous estimates. a new study shows that most of us humans are likely inhaling more air pollution each year. for years the clean air act has proved that health and prosperity go hand in hand. the landmark law is now under threat. david doniger senior strategic director of the climate clean energy program has helped shape federal and global climate related policies since he joined nrdc in. the trump administration failed to monitor air pollution in the toxic aftermath of hurricane harvey. also trump is taking a chainsaw to our protections and the epa can t count to. plus the solar industry pleads for mercy and the president says he thinks about climate change all the time. hmm. as greenhouse gasses fill the sky a progressive governor and worried residents take on oil and gasthe state s most powerful industry. also the self styled environmentalist in chief skips a climate summit and the epa s science advisory board misses a big big deadline. plus national parks are getting hazy and trump makes a quixotic bid to buy greenland. trump also kills years of child health research and continues to neglect chemical safety. the tireless efforts of locals are reshaping one of new jersey s most polluted areas. the air in southwestern indiana is bad enough without the emissions from yet another proposed polluter. ten years after the disaster at a tennessee power plant the cleanup crew is seeking justice. at the same time the trump administration is weakening protections for this toxic pollution. interior s bernhardt helped bury a damning pesticide report the clean air committee goes soft on soot and trump nominates a climate change denier to the fed board. trump s wildfire lies zinke s acronym defense and the epa s forced altruism involving truck pollution. everything you wanted to know about our changing climate but were too afraid to ask. so take it somewhere else says chicago s southeast side. residents who live near the country s busiest ports are getting a new lens on the pollution in their backyards and new tactics to help fight it. nrdc s gina ramirez is helping to bring attention to the wafts of manganese dust that plague her family and neighbors on chicago s southeast side. short answer yes. even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet. trump won t sign the g climate commitment pruitt doesn t have time for smog limits and zinke cancels science. as temperatures and carbon levels rise even breathing has become a challenge. here s what you can do to help clear the air. trump rolls back fuel efficiency standards while his epa chief celebrates the country s clean air. scientist kim knowlton monitors the inextricable connections between the planets fragile health and our own. since this giant salty lake in the desert lost its water supply its bird habitat has been shrinking and more toxic dust is wafting up from its dry lake bed. can the salton sea be saved considering making the switch heres everything you need to know about driving electric cars and hybrids. the new proposal would take us backward on climate tilt the grid toward coal and actually kill people. every time you go outside you may be inhaling harmful chemicals. but dont hold your breath. just use your head. so many technological innovations in the automobile industry stem directly from guidelines intended to reduce gas guzzling. if we lose these guidelines we ll also lose a lot of our workforce. roadside plants helped officials trace the source of a public health crisis and led to new standards for clean air in oregon. southeast side residents have been plagued by a heavy metal that s known to negatively impact the brain function of children. a step by step guide to protecting your community from dirty development projects. plus your one and only chance to save the clean power plan and steve bannon s role in the paris climate withdrawal. sometimes the best way to turn your anger into action is to pick up the phone. follow these tips to minimize your anxiety and maximize your impact. the epa lets states pollute other states air the atlantic coast pipeline fails and fails again to follow the law and ryan zinke actually says the government works for oil companies. but plans to cut local carbon pollution might help this asthma capital shake its wheezy reputation. a recent study found that the state is home to four of the country s most polluting power plants. but elected officials won t even show up to hear their constituents concerns about it. oil trains won t get better brakes air conditioners won t get safer chemicals and children lose their epa advocate. when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosureshelp save naturein this article we discuss the major causes of pollution in a bid to understand how we are contributing to environmental degradation directly or indirectly. in this article we discuss the major causes of pollution in a bid to understand how we are contributing to environmental degradation directly or indirectly. a study conducted in revealed that percent of deaths in the world are directly or indirectly related to air water and land pollution. basically environmental pollution is a phenomenon wherein certain pollutants are introduced in the environment either knowingly or unknowingly. this in turn hampers the balance of the ecosystem and triggers various environmental issues. the severity of pollution depends on chemical nature and concentration of these pollutants in the environment. there are different types of pollution the major ones being air pollution water pollution and land pollution. irrespective of which part of the world we are talking about each of these three types have different causes and therefore they have to be discussed individually. while pollution is caused by natural as well as man made sources it is the man made pollution which is adding to the severity of this issue and threatening the existence of life on the planet. to a large extent environmental pollution can be attributed to various human activities such as transportation industrial production construction mining agriculture etc. these activities which are technically referred to as the anthropogenic causes of pollution have been polluting the environment since ages. however the rate at which pollution is happening today we are left with no option but to take a serious note of it. air pollution is one of the major environmental problems in the world. the united states which constitutes for approximately percent of the world population alone produces percent of the total carbon dioxide in the world. among the leading causes of air pollution human transportation is by far the most prominent. millions of vehicles dump tons of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere every single day. other than these vehicles industrial plants which release various harmful gases by burning fossil fuels have a major share in polluting the air. it may come as a surprise for many but agricultural activities such as clearance of land for agriculture and use of pesticides also contribute to this form of pollution to a significant extent. water pollution is a broad concept which encompasses the pollution of inland water sources as well as ocean bodies on the planet. while inland water sources have been turned into virtual dumping sites owing to industrial pollution ocean bodies bear the brunt of marine transportation and oil spills. the amount of sewage waste generated by a single household may not seem much but if we take into consideration the fact that there are millions of households things become serious. a significant proportion of waste produced in these homes is directed to water sources without being subjected to proper treatment. other than sewage fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture also contaminate water. they make their way to water sources through surface runoff during precipitation. as for ocean pollution causes oil spills have a major role to play. the rising number of oil spills over the last few years is in fact a serious concern. land pollution also known as soil pollution is actually the process wherein soil is contaminated due to the introduction of some harmful chemical substances in it. among the various human activities which contribute to land pollution agriculture and mining are perhaps the most prominent ones. when it comes to soil pollution the list of contaminants includes chlorinated hydrocarbons chromium cadmium lead zinc etc. other than the practice of agriculture and mining dumping of industrial and domestic waste in the soil also pollutes it. the harmful chemicals which are suspended in the air get dissolved in rainwater and pollute the soil when they come to the earth s surface in the form of acid rain. similarly surface runoff transports contaminants from one place to another and adds to land pollution. owing to the interrelationship between these forms of pollution one can t afford to ignore their causes and effects. while many people are of the opinion that pollution is only caused due to chemical substances the fact is that even energy in excess can cause pollution. noise pollution and thermal pollution are the best examples of the same. if you are still not able to understand the seriousness of the issue maybe a closer look at its harmful effects will come as an eye opener for you. like it share it uncategorized our site includes quite a bit of content so if youre having an issue finding what youre looking for go on ahead and use that search feature there copyright help save nature buzzle. com inc. quail hill pkwy suite irvine ca there are many sources of pollution. anything which disturbs natural environment can cause pollution. much of pollution is caused by human activities although there are natural causes such as forest fires. humans are currently the main contributor to pollution of our planet. for example industrial waste in water bodies damages and disturbs the water life. excess noise from automobiles cities and airplanes causes noise pollution. to learn more about the causes of air pollution specifically see this answer. to learn more about the causes of water pollution specifically see this answer. to learn more about the causes of land pollution specifically see this answer. see below... pollution is harmful material released into the environment. one result of air pollution is acid rain. this occurs when exhaust from industries mixes with moisture in the air. this precipitation then falls as acid rain. it has damaged historic buildings bridges cathedrals and monuments across western europe. over the years acid rain has also damaged forests and freshwater lakes. categoriesair pollution is the presence of substances in the atmosphere that are harmful to the health of humans and other living beings or cause damage to the climate or to materials. there are many different types of air pollutants such as gases particulates and biological molecules. air pollution may cause diseases allergies and even death to humans it may also cause harm to other living organisms such as animals and food crops and may damage the natural environment or built environment. both human activity and natural processes can generate air pollution. air pollution is a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related diseases including respiratory infections heart disease copd stroke and lung cancer. growing evidence suggests that air pollution exposure may be associated with reduced iq scores impaired cognition increased risk for psychiatric disorders such as depression and detrimental perinatal health. the human health effects of poor air quality are far reaching but principally affect the bodys respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. individual reactions to air pollutants depend on the type of pollutant a person is exposed to the degree of exposure and the individuals health status and genetics. outdoor air pollution alone causes. to. million deaths annually making it one of the top contributors to human death. overall air pollution causes the deaths of around million people worldwide each year and is the worlds largest single environmental health risk. indoor air pollution and poor urban air quality are listed as two of the worlds worst toxic pollution problems in the blacksmith institute worlds worst polluted places report. the scope of the air pollution crisis is enormous of the worlds population breathes dirty air to some degree. although the health consequences are extensive the way the problem is handled is often haphazard. productivity losses and degraded quality of life caused by air pollution are estimated to cost the world economy trillion per year but along with health and mortality impacts are an externality to the contemporary economic system and most human activity albeit sometimes being moderately regulated and monitored. various pollution control technologies and strategies are available to reduce air pollution. to reduce the impacts of air pollution both international and national legislation and regulation have been implemented to regulate air pollution. local laws where well enforced have led to strong public health improvements. at the international level some of these efforts have been successful for example the montreal protocol was successful at reducing release of harmful ozone depleting chemicals or the helsinki protocol which reduced sulfur emissions while other attempts have so far been less successful in implementation such as international action on climate change. an air pollutant is a material in the air that can have adverse effects on humans and the ecosystem. the substance can be solid particles liquid droplets or gases. a pollutant can be of natural origin or man made. pollutants are classified as primary or secondary. primary pollutants are usually produced by processes such as ash from a volcanic eruption. other examples include carbon monoxide gas from motor vehicle exhausts or sulfur dioxide released from factories. secondary pollutants are not emitted directly. rather they form in the air when primary pollutants react or interact. ground level ozone is a prominent example of a secondary pollutant. some pollutants may be both primary and secondary they are both emitted directly and formed from other primary pollutants. pollutants emitted into the atmosphere by human activity include secondary pollutants include minor air pollutants include persistent organic pollutants are organic compounds that are resistant to environmental degradation through chemical biological and photolytic processes. because of this they have been observed to persist in the environment to be capable of long range transport bioaccumulate in human and animal tissue biomagnify in food chains and to have potentially significant impacts on human health and the environment. these are mostly related to the burning of fuel. there are also sources from processes other than combustion air pollutant emission factors are reported representative values that attempt to relate the quantity of a pollutant released to the ambient air with an activity associated with the release of that pollutant. these factors are usually expressed as the weight of pollutant divided by a unit weight volume distance or duration of the activity emitting the pollutant. such factors facilitate estimation of emissions from various sources of air pollution. in most cases these factors are simply averages of all available data of acceptable quality and are generally assumed to be representative of long term averages. there are compounds in the list of persistent organic pollutants. dioxins and furans are two of them and intentionally created by combustion of organics like open burning of plastics. these compounds are also endocrine disruptors and can mutate the human genes. the united states environmental protection agency has published a compilation of air pollutant emission factors for a wide range of industrial sources. the united kingdom australia canada and many other countries have published similar compilations as well as the european environment agency. air pollution risk is a function of the hazard of the pollutant and the exposure to that pollutant. air pollution exposure can be expressed for an individual for certain groups or for entire populations. for example one may want to calculate the exposure to a hazardous air pollutant for a geographic area which includes the various microenvironments and age groups. this can be calculated as an inhalation exposure. this would account for daily exposure in various settings. the exposure needs to include different age and other demographic groups especially infants children pregnant women and other sensitive subpopulations. the exposure to an air pollutant must integrate the concentrations of the air pollutant with respect to the time spent in each setting and the respective inhalation rates for each subgroup for each specific time that the subgroup is in the setting and engaged in particular activities. for example a small childs inhalation rate will be less than that of an adult. a child engaged in vigorous exercise will have a higher respiration rate than the same child in a sedentary activity. the daily exposure then needs to reflect the time spent in each micro environmental setting and the type of activities in these settings. the air pollutant concentration in each microactivity microenvironmental setting is summed to indicate the exposure. for some pollutants such as black carbon traffic related exposures may dominate total exposure despite short exposure times since high concentrations coincide with proximity to major roads or participation to traffic. a large portion of total daily exposure occurs as short peaks of high concentrations but it remains unclear how to define peaks and determine their frequency and health impact. in the who halved its recommended guideline limit for tiny particles from burning fossil fuels. the new limit for nitrogen dioxide is lower. a lack of ventilation indoors concentrates air pollution where people often spend the majority of their time. radon gas a carcinogen is exuded from the earth in certain locations and trapped inside houses. building materials including carpeting and plywood emit formaldehyde gas. paint and solvents give off volatile organic compounds as they dry. lead paint can degenerate into dust and be inhaled. intentional air pollution is introduced with the use of air fresheners incense and other scented items. controlled wood fires in cook stoves and fireplaces can add significant amounts of harmful smoke particulates into the air inside and out. indoor pollution fatalities may be caused by using pesticides and other chemical sprays indoors without proper ventilation. carbon monoxide poisoning and fatalities are often caused by faulty vents and chimneys or by the burning of charcoal indoors or in a confined space such as a tent. chronic carbon monoxide poisoning can result even from poorly adjusted pilot lights. traps are built into all domestic plumbing to keep sewer gas and hydrogen sulfide out of interiors. clothing emits tetrachloroethylene or other dry cleaning fluids for days after dry cleaning. though its use has now been banned in many countries the extensive use of asbestos in industrial and domestic environments in the past has left a potentially very dangerous material in many localities. asbestosis is a chronic inflammatory medical condition affecting the tissue of the lungs. it occurs after long term heavy exposure to asbestos from asbestos containing materials in structures. sufferers have severe dyspnea and are at an increased risk regarding several different types of lung cancer. as clear explanations are not always stressed in non technical literature care should be taken to distinguish between several forms of relevant diseases. according to the world health organization these may be defined as asbestosis lung cancer and peritoneal mesothelioma. biological sources of air pollution are also found indoors as gases and airborne particulates. pets produce dander people produce dust from minute skin flakes and decomposed hair dust mites in bedding carpeting and furniture produce enzymes and micrometre sized fecal droppings inhabitants emit methane mold forms on walls and generates mycotoxins and spores air conditioning systems can incubate legionnaires disease and mold and houseplants soil and surrounding gardens can produce pollen dust and mold. indoors the lack of air circulation allows these airborne pollutants to accumulate more than they would otherwise occur in nature. even at levels lower than those considered safe by united states regulators exposure to three components of air pollution fine particulate matter nitrogen dioxide and ozone correlates with cardiac and respiratory illness. in air pollution caused one in eight deaths in europe and was a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related diseases including respiratory infections heart disease copd stroke and lung cancer. the health effects caused by air pollution may include difficulty in breathing wheezing coughing asthma and worsening of existing respiratory and cardiac conditions. these effects can result in increased medication use increased doctor or emergency department visits more hospital admissions and premature death. the human health effects of poor air quality are far reaching but principally affect the bodys respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. individual reactions to air pollutants depend on the type of pollutant a person is exposed to the degree of exposure and the individuals health status and genetics. the most common sources of air pollution include particulates ozone nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. children aged less than five years who live in developing countries are the most vulnerable population in terms of total deaths attributable to indoor and outdoor air pollution. the world health organization estimated in that every year air pollution causes the premature death of some million people worldwide. studies published in march indicated that the number may be around. million. india has the highest death rate due to air pollution. india also has more deaths from asthma than any other nation according to the world health organization. in december air pollution was estimated to kill people in china each year. there is a positive correlation between pneumonia related deaths and air pollution from motor vehicle emissions. annual premature european deaths caused by air pollution are estimated at an important cause of these deaths is nitrogen dioxide and other nitrogen oxides emitted by road vehicles. in a consultation document the uk government disclosed that nitrogen dioxide is responsible for premature uk deaths per annum. across the european union air pollution is estimated to reduce life expectancy by almost nine months. causes of deaths include strokes heart disease copd lung cancer and lung infections. urban outdoor air pollution is estimated to cause. million deaths worldwide per year. children are particularly at risk due to the immaturity of their respiratory organ systems. the us epa estimated in that a proposed set of changes in diesel engine technology could result in fewer premature mortalities fewer heart attacks fewer emergency department visits by children with asthma and fewer respiratory related hospital admissions each year in the united states. the us epa has estimated that limiting ground level ozone concentration to parts per billion would avert to premature deaths nationwide in compared with the ppb standard. the agency projected the more protective standard would also prevent an additional cases of aggravated asthma and more than a million cases of missed work or school. following this assessment the epa acted to protect public health by lowering the national ambient air quality standards for ground level ozone to parts per billion. a new economic study of the health impacts and associated costs of air pollution in the los angeles basin and san joaquin valley of southern california shows that more than people die prematurely each year because air pollution levels violate federal standards. the number of annual premature deaths is considerably higher than the fatalities related to auto collisions in the same area which average fewer than per year. a study found that outdoor air pollution is associated with substantially increased mortality even at low pollution levels below the current european and north american standards and who guideline values shortly before the who adjusted its guidelines. the largest cause is air pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion mostly the production and use of cars electricity production and heating. needed diesel exhaust is a major contributor to combustion derived particulate matter air pollution. in several human experimental studies using a well validated exposure chamber setup de has been linked to acute vascular dysfunction and increased thrombus formation. the mechanisms linking air pollution to increased cardiovascular mortality are uncertain but probably include pulmonary and systemic inflammation. a study by greenpeace estimates there are. million annual premature deaths worldwide because of pollutants released by high emission power stations and vehicle exhausts deaths occur in the middle east each year due to pollution. a study by scientists of u. k. and u. s. universities that uses a high spatial resolution model and an updated concentration response function concluded in that. million global excess deaths in and. million in or a fifth were due to air pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion significantly higher than earlier estimates and with spatially subdivided mortality impacts. a review of evidence found that ambient air pollution exposure is a risk factor correlating with increased total mortality from cardiovascular events. air pollution is also emerging as a risk factor for stroke particularly in developing countries where pollutant levels are highest. a study found that in women air pollution is not associated with hemorrhagic but with ischemic stroke. air pollution was also found to be associated with increased incidence and mortality from coronary stroke in a cohort study in. associations are believed to be causal and effects may be mediated by vasoconstriction low grade inflammation and atherosclerosis other mechanisms such as autonomic nervous system imbalance have also been suggested. research has demonstrated increased risk of developing asthma and copd from increased exposure to traffic related air pollution. additionally air pollution has been associated with increased hospitalization and mortality from asthma and copd. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease includes diseases such as chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a study conducted in in the wake of the great smog of compared london residents with residents of gloucester peterborough and norwich three towns with low reported death rates from chronic bronchitis. all subjects were male postal truck drivers aged to. compared to the subjects from the outlying towns the london subjects exhibited more severe respiratory symptoms reduced lung function and increased sputum production and purulence. the differences were more pronounced for subjects aged to. the study controlled for age and smoking habits so concluded that air pollution was the most likely cause of the observed differences. more studies have shown that air pollution exposure from traffic reduces lung function development in children and lung function may be compromised by air pollution even at low concentrations. air pollution exposure also cause lung cancer in non smokers. it is believed that much like cystic fibrosis by living in a more urban environment serious health hazards become more apparent. studies have shown that in urban areas people suffer mucus hypersecretion lower levels of lung function and more self diagnosis of chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a review of evidence regarding whether ambient air pollution exposure is a risk factor for cancer in found solid data to conclude that long term exposure to pm. increases the overall risk of non accidental mortality by per a microg m increase. exposure to pm. was also associated with an increased risk of mortality from lung cancer and total cardiovascular mortality. the review further noted that living close to busy traffic appears to be associated with elevated risks of these three outcomes increase in lung cancer deaths cardiovascular deaths and overall non accidental deaths. the reviewers also found suggestive evidence that exposure to pm. is positively associated with mortality from coronary heart diseases and exposure to so increases mortality from lung cancer but the data was insufficient to provide solid conclusions. another investigation showed that higher activity level increases deposition fraction of aerosol particles in human lung and recommended avoiding heavy activities like running in outdoor space at polluted areas. in a large danish epidemiological study found an increased risk of lung cancer for people who lived in areas with high nitrogen oxide concentrations. in this study the association was higher for non smokers than smokers. an additional danish study also in likewise noted evidence of possible associations between air pollution and other forms of cancer including cervical cancer and brain cancer. in a study of taiwanese residents over a period of estimated that every g m decrease in the ambient concentration of pm. was associated with a reduced risk of chronic kidney disease development. in the united states despite the passage of the clean air act in in at least million americans were living in non attainment areasregions in which the concentration of certain air pollutants exceeded federal standards. these dangerous pollutants are known as the criteria pollutants and include ozone particulate matter sulfur dioxide nitrogen dioxide carbon monoxide and lead. protective measures to ensure childrens health are being taken in cities such as new delhi india where buses now use compressed natural gas to help eliminate the pea soup smog. a recent study in europe has found that exposure to ultrafine particles can increase blood pressure in children. according to a who report in polluted air leads to the poisoning of millions of children under the age of resulting in the death of some six hundred thousand children annually. prenatal exposure to polluted air has been linked to a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders in children. for example exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons was associated with reduced iq scores and symptoms of anxiety and depression. they can also lead to detrimental perinatal health outcomes that are often fatal in developing countries. a study found that pahs might play a role in the development of childhood attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. researchers have also begun to find evidence for air pollution as a risk factor for autism spectrum disorder. in los angeles children who were living in areas with high levels of traffic related air pollution were more likely to be diagnosed with autism between years of age. the connection between air pollution and neurodevelopmental disorders in children is thought to be related to epigenetic dysregulation of the primordial germ cells embryo and fetus during a critical period. some pahs are considered endocrine disruptors and are lipid soluble. when they build up in adipose tissue they can be transferred across the placenta. ambient levels of air pollution have been associated with preterm birth and low birth weight. a who worldwide survey on maternal and perinatal health found a statistically significant association between low birth weights and increased levels of exposure to pm.. women in regions with greater than average pm. levels had statistically significant higher odds of pregnancy resulting in a low birth weight infant even when adjusted for country related variables. the effect is thought to be from stimulating inflammation and increasing oxidative stress. a study by the university of york found that in exposure to pm. was strongly associated with of preterm births globally which was approximately. million premature births. the countries with the highest air pollution associated preterm births were in south and east asia the middle east north africa and west sub saharan africa. the source of pm. differs greatly by region. in south and east asia pregnant women are frequently exposed to indoor air pollution because of wood and other biomass fuels being used for cooking which are responsible for more than of regional pollution. in the middle east north africa and west sub saharan africa fine pm comes from natural sources such as dust storms. the united states had an estimated preterm births associated with exposure to pm. in. a study performed by wang et al. between the years of and has found a correlation between sulfur dioxide and total suspended particulates and preterm births and low birth weights in beijing. a group of pregnant women in four separate regions of beijing were monitored from early pregnancy to delivery along with daily air pollution levels of sulfur dioxide and tsp. the estimated reduction in birth weight was. g for every g m increase in so and. g for each g m increase in tsp. these associations were statistically significant in both summer and winter although summer was greater. the proportion of low birth weight attributable to air pollution was. this is the largest attributable risk ever reported for the known risk factors of low birth weight. coal stoves which are in of homes are a major source of air pollution in this area. brauer et al. studied the relationship between air pollution and proximity to a highway with pregnancy outcomes in a vancouver cohort of pregnant woman using addresses to estimate exposure during pregnancy. exposure to no no co pm and pm. were associated with infants born small for gestational age. women living less than meters away from an expressway or highway were more likely to give birth to a sga infant. even in areas with relatively low levels of air pollution public health effects can be significant and costly since a large number of people breathe in such pollutants. a study published in found that even in areas of the u. s. where ozone and pm. meet federal standards medicare recipients who are exposed to more air pollution have higher mortality rates. a scientific study for the british columbia lung association showed that a small improvement in air quality would produce million in annual savings in the metro vancouver region in. this finding is based on health valuation of lethal and sub lethal affects. in scientists found that the boundary layer air over the southern ocean around antarctica is unpolluted by humans. data is accumulating that air pollution exposure also affects the central nervous system. in a june study conducted by researchers at the university of rochester medical center published in the journal environmental health perspectives it was discovered that early exposure to air pollution causes the same damaging changes in the brain as autism and schizophrenia. the study also shows that air pollution also affected short term memory learning ability and impulsivity. lead researcher professor deborah cory slechta said that when we looked closely at the ventricles we could see that the white matter that normally surrounds them hadnt fully developed. it appears that inflammation had damaged those brain cells and prevented that region of the brain from developing and the ventricles simply expanded to fill the space. our findings add to the growing body of evidence that air pollution may play a role in autism as well as in other neurodevelopmental disorders. in a study of mice air pollution also has a more significant negative effect on males than on females. in experimental studies reported the detection of significant episodic cognitive impairment from impurities in indoor air breathed by test subjects who were not informed about changes in the air quality. researchers at the harvard university and suny upstate medical university and syracuse university measured the cognitive performance of participants in three different controlled laboratory atmospheres that simulated those found in conventional and green buildings as well as green buildings with enhanced ventilation. performance was evaluated objectively using the widely used strategic management simulation software simulation tool which is a well validated assessment test for executive decision making in an unconstrained situation allowing initiative and improvisation. significant deficits were observed in the performance scores achieved in increasing concentrations of either volatile organic compounds or carbon dioxide while keeping other factors constant. the highest impurity levels reached are not uncommon in some classroom or office environments. air pollution increases the risk of dementia in people over years old. in india in it was reported that air pollution by black carbon and ground level ozone had reduced crop yields in the most affected areas by almost half in when compared to levels. air pollution costs the world economy trillion per year as a result of productivity losses and degraded quality of life according to a joint study by the world bank and the institute for health metrics and evaluation at the university of washington. these productivity losses are caused by deaths due to diseases caused by air pollution. one out of ten deaths in was caused by diseases associated with air pollution and the problem is getting worse. the problem is even more acute in the developing world. children under age in lower income countries are more than times as likely to die from exposure to air pollution as children in high income countries. the report states that additional economic losses caused by air pollution including health costs and the adverse effect on agricultural and other productivity were not calculated in the report and thus the actual costs to the world economy are far higher than trillion. artificial air pollution may be detectable on earth from distant vantage points such as other planetary systems via atmospheric seti including no pollution levels and with telescopic technology close to today. it may also be possible to detect extraterrestrial civilizations this way. the worlds worst short term civilian pollution crisis was the bhopal disaster in india. leaked industrial vapours from the union carbide factory belonging to union carbide inc. u. s. a. killed at least people and injured from to. the united kingdom suffered its worst air pollution event when the december great smog of formed over london. in six days more than died and more recent estimates put the figure at nearer. an accidental leak of anthrax spores from a biological warfare laboratory in the former ussr in near sverdlovsk is believed to have caused at least deaths. the worst single incident of air pollution to occur in the us occurred in donora pennsylvania in late october when people died and over were injured. there are now practical alternatives to the principal causes of air pollution various pollution control technologies and strategies are available to reduce air pollution. at its most basic level land use planning is likely to involve zoning and transport infrastructure planning. in most developed countries land use planning is an important part of social policy ensuring that land is used efficiently for the benefit of the wider economy and population as well as to protect the environment. because a large share of air pollution is caused by combustion of fossil fuels such as coal and oil the reduction of these fuels can reduce air pollution drastically. most effective is the switch to clean power sources such as wind power solar power hydro power which dont cause air pollution. efforts to reduce pollution from mobile sources includes expanding regulation to new sources increased fuel efficiency conversion to cleaner fuels and conversion to electric vehicles. titanium dioxide has been researched for its ability to reduce air pollution. ultraviolet light will release free electrons from material thereby creating free radicals which break up vocs and nox gases. one form is superhydrophilic. in prof. tony ryan and prof. simon armitage of university of sheffield prepared a meter by meter sized poster coated with microscopic pollution eating nanoparticles of titanium dioxide. placed on a building this giant poster can absorb the toxic emission from around cars each day. a very effective means to reduce air pollution is the transition to renewable energy. according to a study published in energy and environmental science in the switch to renewable energy in the united states would eliminate about premature mortalities per year and about in if no biomass were used. this would save about billion in health costs a year due to reduced air pollution in or about. of the u. s. gross domestic product. air quality improvement is a near term benefit among the many societal benefits from climate change mitigation. there is limited evidence that efforts to reduce particulate matter in the air can result in better health in africa the middle east eastern europe central asia and southeast asia. the following items are commonly used as pollution control devices in industry and transportation. they can either destroy contaminants or remove them from an exhaust stream before it is emitted into the atmosphere. spatiotemporal monitoring of air quality may be necessary for improving air quality and thereby the health and safety of the public and assessing impacts of interventions. such monitoring is done to different extents with different regulatory requirements with discrepant regional coverage by a variety of organizations and governance entities such as using a variety of technologies for use of the data and sensing such mobile iot sensors satellites and monitoring stations. in general there are two types of air quality standards. the first class of standards set maximum atmospheric concentrations for specific pollutants. environmental agencies enact regulations which are intended to result in attainment of these target levels. the second class take the form of a scale with various thresholds which is used to communicate to the public the relative risk of outdoor activity. the scale may or may not distinguish between different pollutants. in canada air pollution and associated health risks are measured with the air quality health index. it is a health protection tool used to make decisions to reduce short term exposure to air pollution by adjusting activity levels during increased levels of air pollution. the aqhi is a federal program jointly coordinated by health canada and environment canada. however the aqhi program would not be possible without the commitment and support of the provinces municipalities and ngos. from air quality monitoring to health risk communication and community engagement local partners are responsible for the vast majority of work related to aqhi implementation. the aqhi provides a number from to to indicate the level of health risk associated with local air quality. occasionally when the amount of air pollution is abnormally high the number may exceed. the aqhi provides a local air quality current value as well as a local air quality maximums forecast for today tonight and tomorrow and provides associated health advice. as it is now known that even low levels of air pollution can trigger discomfort for the sensitive population the index has been developed as a continuum the higher the number the greater the health risk and need to take precautions. the index describes the level of health risk associated with this number as low moderate high or very high and suggests steps that can be taken to reduce exposure. the measurement is based on the observed relationship of nitrogen dioxide ground level ozone and particulates with mortality from an analysis of several canadian cities. significantly all three of these pollutants can pose health risks even at low levels of exposure especially among those with pre existing health problems. when developing the aqhi health canadas original analysis of health effects included five major air pollutants particulates ozone and nitrogen dioxide as well as sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide. the latter two pollutants provided little information in predicting health effects and were removed from the aqhi formulation. the aqhi does not measure the effects of odour pollen dust heat or humidity. ta luft is the german air quality regulation. air pollution hotspots are areas where air pollution emissions expose individuals to increased negative health effects. they are particularly common in highly populated urban areas where there may be a combination of stationary sources and mobile sources of pollution. emissions from these sources can cause respiratory disease childhood asthma cancer and other health problems. fine particulate matter such as diesel soot which contributes to more than. million premature deaths around the world each year is a significant problem. it is very small and can lodge itself within the lungs and enter the bloodstream. diesel soot is concentrated in densely populated areas and one in six people in the u. s. live near a diesel pollution hot spot. while air pollution hotspots affect a variety of populations some groups are more likely to be located in hotspots. previous studies have shown disparities in exposure to pollution by race and or income. hazardous land uses tend to be located where property values and income levels are low. low socioeconomic status can be a proxy for other kinds of social vulnerability including race a lack of ability to influence regulation and a lack of ability to move to neighborhoods with less environmental pollution. these communities bear a disproportionate burden of environmental pollution and are more likely to face health risks such as cancer or asthma. studies show that patterns in race and income disparities not only indicate a higher exposure to pollution but also higher risk of adverse health outcomes. communities characterized by low socioeconomic status and racial minorities can be more vulnerable to cumulative adverse health impacts resulting from elevated exposure to pollutants than more privileged communities. blacks and latinos generally face more pollution than whites and asians and low income communities bear a higher burden of risk than affluent ones. racial discrepancies are particularly distinct in suburban areas of the southern united states and metropolitan areas of the midwestern and western united states. residents in public housing who are generally low income and can not move to healthier neighborhoods are highly affected by nearby refineries and chemical plants. air pollution is usually concentrated in densely populated metropolitan areas especially in developing countries where environmental regulations are relatively lax or nonexistent. however even populated areas in developed countries attain unhealthy levels of pollution with los angeles and rome being two examples. between and the incidence of lung cancer in beijing near doubled. while smoking remains the leading cause of lung cancer in china the number of smokers is falling while lung cancer rates are rising. in europe council directive ec on ambient air quality assessment and management provides a common strategy against which member states can set objectives for ambient air quality in order to avoid prevent or reduce harmful effects on human health and the environment... and improve air quality where it is unsatisfactory. on july in the case dieter janecek v freistaat bayern the european court of justice ruled that under this directive citizens have the right to require national authorities to implement a short term action plan that aims to maintain or achieve compliance to air quality limit values. this important case law appears to confirm the role of the ec as centralised regulator to european nation states as regards air pollution control. it places a supranational legal obligation on the uk to protect its citizens from dangerous levels of air pollution furthermore superseding national interests with those of the citizen. in the european commission threatened the uk with legal action against the successive breaching of pm limit values. the uk government has identified that if fines are imposed they could cost the nation upwards of million per year. in march the greater london built up area remains the only uk region in breach of the ecs limit values and has been given months to implement an emergency action plan aimed at meeting the eu air quality directive. the city of london has dangerous levels of pm concentrations estimated to cause deaths per year within the city. as well as the threat of eu fines in it was threatened with legal action for scrapping the western congestion charge zone which is claimed to have led to an increase in air pollution levels. in response to these charges boris johnson mayor of london has criticised the current need for european cities to communicate with europe through their nation states central government arguing that in future a great city like london should be permitted to bypass its government and deal directly with the european commission regarding its air quality action plan. this can be interpreted as recognition that cities can transcend the traditional national government organisational hierarchy and develop solutions to air pollution using global governance networks for example through transnational relations. transnational relations include but are not exclusive to national governments and intergovernmental organisations allowing sub national actors including cities and regions to partake in air pollution control as independent actors. particularly promising at present are global city partnerships. these can be built into networks for example the c cities climate leadership group of which london is a member. the c is a public non state network of the worlds leading cities that aims to curb their greenhouse emissions. the c has been identified as governance from the middle and is an alternative to intergovernmental policy. it has the potential to improve urban air quality as participating cities exchange information learn from best practices and consequently mitigate carbon dioxide emissions independently from national government decisions. a criticism of the c network is that its exclusive nature limits influence to participating cities and risks drawing resources away from less powerful city and regional actors. according to a projection by half of the worlds pollution emissions could be generated by africa. potential contributors to such an outcome include increased burning activities traffic agri food and chemical industries sand dust from the sahara and overall population growth. according to oecd by outdoor air pollution is projected to become the top cause of environmentally related deaths worldwide. global warming portal environment portalcategorieswater pollution is the contamination of water bodies usually as a result of human activities in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services that it would otherwise provide. water bodies include for example lakes rivers oceans aquifers reservoirs and groundwater. water pollution results when contaminants are introduced into these water bodies. in addition to damage to many species water pollution can also lead to water borne diseases for people. water pollution traditionally is attributed to four sources which provide the organization of this article water pollution can also be classified as surface water pollution or groundwater pollution. sources of water pollution are either point sources or non point sources. point sources have one identifiable cause such as a storm drain or a wastewater treatment plant. non point sources are more diffuse such as agricultural runoff. pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. supplying clean drinking water is an important ecosystem service provided by some freshwater systems but approximately million people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water because of pollution. a practical definition of water pollution is water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. therefore pollution is associated with concepts attributed to humans namely the negative alterations and the uses of the water body. water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. due to these contaminants it either does not support a human use such as drinking water or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities such as fish. agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution. the use of fertilizers leads to nutrient pollution in which excess nutrients usually caused by nitrogen or phosphorus containing compounds that are the main components. sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farm fields and pastures discharges from septic tanks and feedlots. in addition to plant focused agriculture fish farming is also a source of pollution. additionally ag runoff often contains high levels of pesticides. using the us as an example the main industrial consumers of water are power plants petroleum refineries iron and steel mills pulp and paper mills and food processing industries. some industries discharge nutrients which impose high bod. some wastes are persistent organic pollutants such as per and polyfluoroalkyl substances sewage typically consists of. water and. solids. globally about. billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of according to an estimate by the joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation. lack of access to sanitation often leads to water pollution e. g. via the practice of open defecation. simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events. when sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows. sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to eutrophication. it is a major source of phosphate for example. sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene cosmetics pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites even at very low concentrations hormones and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action can have an adverse impacts. water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide ranging consequences the environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products is being investigated since at least the s. ppcps include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. more than twenty million tons of ppcps are produced every year. the european union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be priority substances. the source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces sewage blackwater manure that has found its way into the water body. the cause for this can be lack of sanitation or poorly functioning on site sanitation systems sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows during storm events and intensive agriculture. pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include burkholderia pseudomallei cryptosporidium parvum giardia lamblia salmonella norovirus and other viruses parasitic worms including the schistosoma type. a study published in stated that polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed. million people. urban runoff is stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops roads and parking lots and reservoirs. often it is captured in large retaining ponds. it is subject to high suspended solids as well and elevated nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. thermal pollution sometimes called thermal enrichment is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature. thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence. thermal pollution unlike chemical pollution results in a change in the physical properties of water. a common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. the introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. it causes biological pollution. sources of surface water pollution can be grouped into two categories based on their origin point sources and nonpoint sources. point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single identifiable source such as a pipe or ditch. examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant a factory or a city storm drain. the u. s. clean water act defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes. the cwa definition of point source was amended in to include municipal storm sewer systems as well as industrial storm water such as from construction sites. groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater. this type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent contaminant or impurity in the groundwater in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution. pollution can occur from on site sanitation systems landfills effluent from wastewater treatment plants leaking sewers petrol filling stations or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture. pollution can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants such as arsenic or fluoride. using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods physical chemical and biological. some methods may be conducted in situ without sampling such as temperature. others involve collection of samples followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. standardized validated analytical test methods for water and wastewater samples have been published. common physical tests of water include temperature specific conductance or electrical conductance or conductivity solids concentrations and turbidity. water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. frequently used parameters that are quantified are ph biochemical oxygen demand chemical oxygen demand dissolved oxygen total hardness nutrients metals oil and grease total petroleum hydrocarbons surfactants and pesticides. the complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on site because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings. measurements commonly made on site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature ph dissolved oxygen conductivity oxygen reduction potential turbidity and secchi disk depth. sampling of water for physical or chemical testing can be done by several methods depending on the accuracy needed and the characteristics of the contaminant. sampling methods include for example simple random sampling stratified sampling systematic and grid sampling adaptive cluster sampling grab samples semi continuous monitoring and continuous passive sampling remote surveillance remote sensing and biomonitoring. the use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. the use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring. this refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment. biological testing involves the use of plant animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem. they are any biological species or group of species whose function population or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present. one example of a group of bio indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. such organisms can be monitored for changes that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries. for example water pollution in india and china is wide spread. about percent of the water in the cities of china is polluted. one aspect of environmental protection are mandatory regulations but they are only part of the solution. other important tools in pollution control include environmental education economic instruments market forces and stricter enforcements. standards can be precise or imprecise which would require the use of best available technology or best practicable environmental option. market based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges subsidies deposit or refund schemes the creation of a market in pollution credits and enforcement incentives. moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches integrated control measures trans boundary considerations complementary and supplementary control measures life cycle considerations the impacts of chemical mixtures. control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. the infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants. agricultural wastewater treatment for farms and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow. water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels. municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants decentralized wastewater systems nature based solutions or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. for example waste stabilization ponds are a low cost treatment option for sewage particularly for regions with warm climates. uv light can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds. the use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation. well designed and operated systems can remove percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage. some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. while such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants they can also result in large financial costs as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system. in the us cities with large combined systems have not pursued system wide separation projects due to the high cost but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches. in some cases municipalities have installed additional cso storage facilities or expanded sewage treatment capacity. agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals in fertilizer pesticides animal slurry crop residues or irrigation water. agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. it may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater. where land is available for ponds settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles. animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland. constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes. nonpoint source pollution includes sediment runoff nutrient runoff and pesticides. point source pollution includes animal wastes silage liquor milking parlour wastes slaughtering waste vegetable washing water and firewater. many farms generate nonpoint source pollution from surface runoff which is not controlled through a treatment plant. sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls such as mulching and hydroseeding and sediment controls such as sediment basins and silt fences. discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans and specially designed containers and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms. erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology also results in loss of sediment and potentially water pollution. effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of storm water as well as reducing pollutant discharges. local governments use a variety of storm water management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. these techniques called best management practices for water pollution in some countries may focus on water quantity control while others focus on improving water quality and some perform both functions. some examples for legislation to control water pollution are listed below categorieswater pollution is the contamination of water bodies usually as a result of human activities in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services that it would otherwise provide. water bodies include for example lakes rivers oceans aquifers reservoirs and groundwater. water pollution results when contaminants are introduced into these water bodies. in addition to damage to many species water pollution can also lead to water borne diseases for people. water pollution traditionally is attributed to four sources which provide the organization of this article water pollution can also be classified as surface water pollution or groundwater pollution. sources of water pollution are either point sources or non point sources. point sources have one identifiable cause such as a storm drain or a wastewater treatment plant. non point sources are more diffuse such as agricultural runoff. pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. supplying clean drinking water is an important ecosystem service provided by some freshwater systems but approximately million people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water because of pollution. a practical definition of water pollution is water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. therefore pollution is associated with concepts attributed to humans namely the negative alterations and the uses of the water body. water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. due to these contaminants it either does not support a human use such as drinking water or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities such as fish. agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution. the use of fertilizers leads to nutrient pollution in which excess nutrients usually caused by nitrogen or phosphorus containing compounds that are the main components. sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farm fields and pastures discharges from septic tanks and feedlots. in addition to plant focused agriculture fish farming is also a source of pollution. additionally ag runoff often contains high levels of pesticides. using the us as an example the main industrial consumers of water are power plants petroleum refineries iron and steel mills pulp and paper mills and food processing industries. some industries discharge nutrients which impose high bod. some wastes are persistent organic pollutants such as per and polyfluoroalkyl substances sewage typically consists of. water and. solids. globally about. billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of according to an estimate by the joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation. lack of access to sanitation often leads to water pollution e. g. via the practice of open defecation. simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events. when sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows. sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to eutrophication. it is a major source of phosphate for example. sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene cosmetics pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites even at very low concentrations hormones and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action can have an adverse impacts. water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide ranging consequences the environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products is being investigated since at least the s. ppcps include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. more than twenty million tons of ppcps are produced every year. the european union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be priority substances. the source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces sewage blackwater manure that has found its way into the water body. the cause for this can be lack of sanitation or poorly functioning on site sanitation systems sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows during storm events and intensive agriculture. pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include burkholderia pseudomallei cryptosporidium parvum giardia lamblia salmonella norovirus and other viruses parasitic worms including the schistosoma type. a study published in stated that polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed. million people. urban runoff is stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops roads and parking lots and reservoirs. often it is captured in large retaining ponds. it is subject to high suspended solids as well and elevated nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. thermal pollution sometimes called thermal enrichment is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature. thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence. thermal pollution unlike chemical pollution results in a change in the physical properties of water. a common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. the introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. it causes biological pollution. sources of surface water pollution can be grouped into two categories based on their origin point sources and nonpoint sources. point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single identifiable source such as a pipe or ditch. examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant a factory or a city storm drain. the u. s. clean water act defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes. the cwa definition of point source was amended in to include municipal storm sewer systems as well as industrial storm water such as from construction sites. groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater. this type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent contaminant or impurity in the groundwater in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution. pollution can occur from on site sanitation systems landfills effluent from wastewater treatment plants leaking sewers petrol filling stations or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture. pollution can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants such as arsenic or fluoride. using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods physical chemical and biological. some methods may be conducted in situ without sampling such as temperature. others involve collection of samples followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. standardized validated analytical test methods for water and wastewater samples have been published. common physical tests of water include temperature specific conductance or electrical conductance or conductivity solids concentrations and turbidity. water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. frequently used parameters that are quantified are ph biochemical oxygen demand chemical oxygen demand dissolved oxygen total hardness nutrients metals oil and grease total petroleum hydrocarbons surfactants and pesticides. the complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on site because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings. measurements commonly made on site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature ph dissolved oxygen conductivity oxygen reduction potential turbidity and secchi disk depth. sampling of water for physical or chemical testing can be done by several methods depending on the accuracy needed and the characteristics of the contaminant. sampling methods include for example simple random sampling stratified sampling systematic and grid sampling adaptive cluster sampling grab samples semi continuous monitoring and continuous passive sampling remote surveillance remote sensing and biomonitoring. the use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. the use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring. this refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment. biological testing involves the use of plant animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem. they are any biological species or group of species whose function population or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present. one example of a group of bio indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. such organisms can be monitored for changes that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries. for example water pollution in india and china is wide spread. about percent of the water in the cities of china is polluted. one aspect of environmental protection are mandatory regulations but they are only part of the solution. other important tools in pollution control include environmental education economic instruments market forces and stricter enforcements. standards can be precise or imprecise which would require the use of best available technology or best practicable environmental option. market based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges subsidies deposit or refund schemes the creation of a market in pollution credits and enforcement incentives. moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches integrated control measures trans boundary considerations complementary and supplementary control measures life cycle considerations the impacts of chemical mixtures. control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. the infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants. agricultural wastewater treatment for farms and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow. water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels. municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants decentralized wastewater systems nature based solutions or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. for example waste stabilization ponds are a low cost treatment option for sewage particularly for regions with warm climates. uv light can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds. the use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation. well designed and operated systems can remove percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage. some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. while such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants they can also result in large financial costs as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system. in the us cities with large combined systems have not pursued system wide separation projects due to the high cost but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches. in some cases municipalities have installed additional cso storage facilities or expanded sewage treatment capacity. agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals in fertilizer pesticides animal slurry crop residues or irrigation water. agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. it may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater. where land is available for ponds settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles. animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland. constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes. nonpoint source pollution includes sediment runoff nutrient runoff and pesticides. point source pollution includes animal wastes silage liquor milking parlour wastes slaughtering waste vegetable washing water and firewater. many farms generate nonpoint source pollution from surface runoff which is not controlled through a treatment plant. sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls such as mulching and hydroseeding and sediment controls such as sediment basins and silt fences. discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans and specially designed containers and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms. erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology also results in loss of sediment and potentially water pollution. effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of storm water as well as reducing pollutant discharges. local governments use a variety of storm water management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. these techniques called best management practices for water pollution in some countries may focus on water quantity control while others focus on improving water quality and some perform both functions. some examples for legislation to control water pollution are listed below water pollution is a major environmental issue in india. the largest source of water pollution in india is untreatedsewage. other sources of pollution include agricultural runoff and unregulated small scale industry. most rivers lakes and surface water in india are polluted due to industries untreated sewage and solid wastes. a study found that discharge of untreated sewage is the single most important source of pollution of surface and ground water in india. there is a large gap between generation and treatment of domestic waste water in india. the problem is not only that india lacks sufficient treatment capacity but also that the sewage treatment plants that exist do not operate and are not maintained. the majority of the government owned sewage treatment plants remain closed most of the time due to improper design or poor maintenance or lack of reliable electricity supply to operate the plants together with absentee employees and poor management. the waste water generated in these areas normally percolates into the soil or evaporates. the uncollected waste accumulates in the urban areas causing unhygienic conditions and releasing pollutants that leach into surface and groundwater. sewage discharged from cities towns and some villages is the predominant cause of water pollution in india. investment is needed to bridge the gap between the sewage india generates and its treatment capacity of sewage per day. major cities of india produce million litres per day of sewage but the urban sewage treatment capacity is only mld. a large number of indian rivers are severely polluted as a result of discharge of domestic sewage. the central pollution control board a ministry of environment forests government of india entity has established a national water quality monitoring network comprising monitoring stations in states and in union territories on various rivers and water bodies across the country. this effort monitors water quality year round. the monitoring network covers rivers lakes tanks ponds creeks canals drains and wells distributed across india. water samples are routinely analysed for parameters including dissolved oxygen bacteriological and other internationally established parameters for water quality. additionally trace metals parameters and pesticide residues are analysed. biomonitoring is also carried out on specific locations. the scientific analysis of water samples from to indicates that the organic and bacterial contamination is severe in water bodies of india. this is mainly due to discharge of domestic waste water in untreated form mostly from the urban centres of india. in the water quality monitoring found almost all rivers with high levels of bod. the worst pollution in decreasing order were found in river markanda followed by river kali river amlakhadi yamuna canal river yamuna at delhi and river betwa. for context a water sample with a day bod between and mg o l indicates a very clean water to mg o l indicates a moderately clean water to indicates borderline water and greater than mg o l indicates ecologically unsafe polluted water. the levels of bod are severe near the cities and major towns. in rural parts of india the river bod levels were sufficient to support aquatic life. rivers yamuna ganga gomti ghaghara chambal mahi vardha and godavari are amongst the other most coliform polluted water bodies in india. for context coliform must be below mpn ml preferably absent from water for it to be considered safe for general human use and for irrigation where coliform may cause disease outbreak from contaminated water in agriculture. in percent of water quality monitoring reported coliform concentrations above mpn ml. during percent of all water quality monitoring stations reported a total coliform levels exceeding those levels suggesting recent effort to add pollution control infrastructure and upgrade treatment plants in india may be reversing the water pollution trend. treatment of domestic sewage and subsequent utilization of treated sewage for irrigation can prevent pollution of water bodies reduce the demand for fresh water in the irrigation sector and become a resource for irrigation. since indian wastewater treatment plant market has been growing annually at the rate of to percent. the united states is the largest supplier of treatment equipment and supplies to india with percent market share of new installation. at that rate of expansion and assuming the government of india continues on its path of reform major investments in sewage treatment plants and electricity infrastructure development it was estimated india will nearly triple its water treatment capacity by and treatment capacity supply will match indias daily sewage water treatment requirements by about. water conservation in india is gaining pace. the ganga rejuvenation efforts by the union government the yamuna clean up are some of the government initiated efforts. the chennai river restoration trusts efforts to clean the cooum adyar rivers in chennai and civil society efforts spearheaded by organizations like environmentalist foundation of india to clean lakes and ponds in the country are seen as significant development towards water conservation. a joint study by pgimer and the punjab pollution control board in revealed that in villages along the nullah fluoride mercury beta endosulphan and heptachlor pesticide were more than permissible limit in ground and tap water. plus the water had high concentration of cod and bod ammonia phosphate chloride chromium arsenic and chlorpyrifos pesticide. the ground water also contains nickel and selenium while the tap water has high concentration of lead nickel and cadmium. flooding during monsoons worsens indias water pollution problem as it washes and moves solid waste and contaminated soils into its rivers and wetlands. the annual average precipitation in india is about billion cubic metres. from this with the state of indian infrastructure in the available water resource through the rivers is about billion cubic meters. accounting to uneven distribution of rain over the country each year water resources available for utilization including ground water is claimed to be about billion cubic meters. much of this water is unsafe because pollution degrades water quality. water pollution severely limits the amount of water available to indian consumers its industry and its agriculture. more than million people live along the river. an estimated persons ritually bath daily in the river which is considered holy by hindus. ganges river pollution is a major health risk. nrgba was established by the central government of india on february under section of the environment protection act. it also declared ganges as the national river of india. the chair includes the prime minister of india and chief ministers of states through which the ganges flows. by an estimate by delhis sacred yamuna river contained coliform bacteria per cc of water. a number of ngos pressure groups eco clubs as well as citizens movements have been active in their task to clean the river. even though india revised its national water policy in to encourage community participation and decentralize water management the countrys complex bureaucracy ensures that it remains a mere statement of intent. responsibility for managing water issues is fragmented among a dozen different ministries and departments without any coordination. the government bureaucracy and state run project department has failed to solve the problem despite having spent many years and million on this project. water pollution in the united states is a growing problem that became critical in the century with the development of mechanized agriculture mining and industry although laws and regulations introduced in the late century have improved water quality in many water bodies. extensive industrialization and rapid urban growth exacerbated water pollution as a lack of regulation allowed for discharges of sewage toxic chemicals nutrients and other pollutants into surface water. in the early century communities began to install drinking water treatment systems but control of the principal pollution sourcesdomestic sewage industry and agriculturewas not effectively addressed in the us until the later century. these pollution sources can affect both groundwater and surface water. multiple pollution incidents such as the kingston fossil plant coal fly ash slurry spill and the deepwater horizon oil spill have left lasting impacts on water quality ecosystems and public health in the united states. many solutions to water pollution in the united states can be implemented to curtail water pollution. this includes municipal wastewater treatment agricultural and industrial wastewater treatment erosion and sediment control and the control of urban runoff. the continued implementation of pollution prevention control and treatment measures are used to pursue the goal of maintaining water quality within levels specified in federal and state regulations. however many water bodies across the country continue to violate water quality standards in the century. water pollution was identified as a growing problem in the us by scientists government officials and the public in the century. many cities and towns piped their untreated domestic sewage into nearby waterways. wastewater discharged by factories mines and other businesses increased as the economy expanded. large cities and later smaller communities began to install drinking water treatment systems in the early century but sewage treatment plants were limited at that time and not very effective. effective control of sewage and industrial pollution was not comprehensively addressed until later in the century. agricultural pollution emerged as a growing problem in the century with the increased mechanization of agriculture and increasing use of chemicals. following the passage of thelean water act the levels of water pollution in us waterways generally have experienced a dramatic decrease with respect to sewage treatment and many types of industrial wastewater. however more than half of u. s. stream and river miles continue to violate federal water quality standards in the century. surveys of lakes ponds and reservoirs indicated that about percent were impaired and a little more than percent of the nation s coastlines and percent of the surveyed ocean and near coastal areas were also impaired. in a report on water quality in the united states in percent of assessed stream miles percent of assessed lake acres and percent of assessed bays and estuarine square miles were classified as polluted. agriculture industry urban runoff and other sources continue to discharge waste into surface waters nationwide. this poses huge environmental and health risks given that these water sources are used as drinking water and for agricultural use. while the cwa has made positive contributions to the state of surface water in the united states the law does not fully address all aspects of pollution. many think that congress should revise or expand the law to address these problems and gaps in regulation. although the cwa has been effective in controlling point source pollution it has not been as effective with nonpoint sources. despite the negative health and ecosystem impacts of water pollution solutions exist that are able to treat and decrease pollution levels in water bodies. surface water consists of all forms of visible water sources such as oceans lakes and rivers. currently a significant percentage of surface freshwater sources are polluted in the united states. this poses a huge threat to american water sources because over of water used in the united states is from these freshwater sources. a majority of freshwater contamination cases are a result of nutrient pollution which is the result of farm waste and fertilizer entering the water source and resulting in toxic zones with depleted oxygen levels. groundwater is rainfall that collects in porous spaces deep underground which are called aquifers. humans can access the water that collects in an aquifer by building wells to pump the water to the surface for use. about of drinking water in america comes from groundwater sources. when contaminants enter aquifers the pollution spreads eliminating the potential to use the aquifer for drinking water. groundwater contamination is often the result of chemicals that seep through the soil and into the water supply such as pesticides and fertilizers. other causes of contamination in groundwater includes gasoline oil road salts septic tank waste or leakage from landfills. point source pollution occurs when water pollution contamination comes from a single source. point sources could include leaking septic tanks oil spills dumping of waste or wastewater treatment facilities. in order to prevent point source pollution from occurring the clean water act regulates what can be discharged into a water body by requiring each facility to obtain a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit. nonpoint source pollution occurs when the contamination derives from multiple different sources. this type of pollution is very challenging to manage given that the original source may be difficult to identify. nonpoint source pollution is the most common type of pollution because as rainfall runs off of land on its path to different water sources it becomes contaminated by pollutants from the surrounding area. these sources include agriculture related pollutants urban runoff or drainage. the cwa does not authorize the issuance of npdes permits for nonpoint sources trans boundary water pollution occurs when pollution in one country s waters spreads and damages another country s environment or water supply. trans boundary pollution can travel through rivers or ocean currents. historically municipal sewage was a major contributor of water pollution across the united states. the lack of proper treatment of sewage resulted in many contaminated water bodies across the county. domestic sewage became a widespread problem with the onset of the industrial revolution in the century population growth and increasing urbanization. through the early century most communities had no sewage treatment plants or waste disposal sites. some cities built sewer pipes which carried their sewage to a nearby river or coastal area but lacked any treatment of the wastes instead depositing the sewage directly into the water. the first wastewater treatment plants were built in the late and early centuries in the united states and typically did not fully treat the wastes. the extensive construction of new and upgraded sewage treatment systems following the passage of thelean water act has greatly reduced municipal discharges. since the s secondary treatment has been the national standard for municipalities. some individual systems continue to cause localized water quality problems due to outdated or leaking piping and collection systems leading to combined sewer overflows and sanitary sewer overflows. poor upkeep of sewer infrastructure results in contamination from leaks and contributed to a rating from the american society of civil engineers of a d grade for americas wastewater infrastructure. while all domestic wastewater is now treated nationwide leaks and spills of municipal sewage pose a significant problem because wastewater carries diseases like salmonella hepatitis and many other infectious diseases that roughly sickens about. million americans every year. water research during the late s and s indicated that stormwater runoff was a significant cause of water quality impairment in many parts of the us. increased land development throughout the countryin both cities and suburbshas led to an increase in impervious surfaces which generates increased surface runoff during wet weather. the development of new roads and smooth surfaces have contributed to polluted waters easily flowing into nearby rivers lakes and the oceans across the usa. these paved surfaces and roads restrict water from soaking into the ground and instead allows water to freely flow across pavements while picking up chemicals fertilizers pesticides and many other pollutants that causes water pollution in the bodies of water in the usa. early indications of pollution from industrial waste in the united states existed since the s increasing as the industrial revolution expanded throughout the united states and its environmental impacts were observed more frequently. industrial wastes contribute toxic pollutants and chemicals and can have detrimental ecosystem and public health impacts if discharged directly into surface water. historical accounts of early industrial activity in the us provide a general description of the kinds of waste generated. mining operations iron forges and blast furnaces were some of the early industries in the u. s. that generated waste. in the late and early centuries wastes from mining operations entered rivers and streams and iron bloomeries and furnaces used water for cooling. these industries were relatively small businesses generating small amounts of product and the wastes they discharged to rivers and streams were proportionately dilute. however as factories grew in the century so did the quantity of pollution produced. in the early century the introduction of steam engines in both the mining and manufacturing sectors greatly expanded productivity and increased use of the engines generated larger volumes of heated water. the productivity gains along with the introduction of railroads in the s and swhich increased the overall demand for coal and mineralsled to additional generation of wastes. the volumes and concentrations of industrial wastes increased significantly in the mid century in multiple business sectors including mining. mining wastes were increasing not only from coal and mineral mines in the east and south but from mining of gold silver and other metals in the newly developing west. the onset of the second industrial revolution in the mid to late century introduced new heavy industries in the us generating larger volumes and new kinds of wastes. these industries included industrial expansion continued into the century including large scale expansion of paper products manufacturing which produced additional types and quantities of wastes. today industrial pollution is caused by discharges and emissions from manufacturing plants in certain industries which continues to pollute surface waters nationwide. many manufacturing processes generate wastewater contributing to the water pollution found in rivers lakes and oceans. in the u. s. environmental protection agency found that fossil fuel power stations particularly coal fired plants were the largest contributors of industrial water pollution. epa found instances where power plants discharged toxic pollutants such as mercury arsenic and lead into surface waters. although many industrial facilities have added or expanded their wastewater treatment systems to comply with the cwa certain industrial sectors and facilities have not addressed all components in their discharges and continue to contribute significant quantities of pollutants to surface waters in the us. based on a report of industrial and commercial facilities subject to the epa toxics release inventory system discharges of toxic pollutants in totaled about million pounds a decrease of million pounds from mostly due to reduced nitrate discharges. discharges and chemicals from agriculture greatly contributes to water pollution in the us as rainwater flows through fields and into bodies of water. the application of chemical fertilizers collection of animal manure and use of chemicals used by farmers results in nitrogen and phosphorus. when washed away from farming fields nitrogen and phosphorus found in fertilizers can cause eutrophication of water bodies. eutrophication results in algal blooms which deplete oxygen in bodies of water resulting in dead zones where life can no longer be sustained. excessive use or improper use of fertilizers pesticides and various types of chemicals during farming contribute to water pollution and are currently the third largest source for water pollution in lakes second largest source of water pollution in wetlands and a major contributor to pollution in estuaries and ground water. other activities that contribute to water pollution include municipal wastewater is composed of human waste and other residential waste streams. in the united states approximately billion gallons of wastewater are collected every day and sent to sewage treatment plants. wastewater is collected through combined sewers which are used for sanitary waste and stormwater runoff or in separate sanitary sewers. sewage treatment plants include physical removal processes such as screens and settling tanks and biological processes to remove organic matter and pathogens from water. treatment plants have strict permit requirements to ensure that their discharges will not cause harm to the environment or public health. some plants have enhanced treatment processes to control nutrient pollution before discharge. agricultural run off is one of the leading causes of water pollution in the united states. funding from clean water grants are available to farmers to install projects to help control agricultural pollution before it enters water sources. methods to minimize and contain water pollution from agriculture in the united states include watershed efforts nutrient management cover crops buffers management of livestock waste and drainage management. buffers are small strips of land covered in plants that are able to remove pollutants such as nitrogen phosphorus and sediment prior to discharge in a water body. both buffers and crop covers are used to remove these pollutants from agricultural runoff. erosion and sediment controls are techniques used to mitigate sediment pollution in waterways. the most common and efficient control method on agricultural land is crop management which increases soil cover and stabilizes slopes. without proper soil stabilization techniques rainfall can cause large quantities of sediment to be washed away into waterways creating issues with sunlight penetration and visibility. typical preventive measures for construction sites include erosion control matting and mulching and installation of silt fences to trap sediment not captured by the erosion controls. urban areas affect water quality by increasing the volume of run off and pollutant loads. one solution to decrease run off is constructing new surfaces with pervious pavers that allow rainwater to pass through the surface to groundwater aquifers and decrease the quantity of urban run off. additionally proper use and storage of household chemicals are critical to decrease incidences of spills that pollute local waterways. the deepwater horizon oil spill is considered to be the largest marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry. the incident began on april when a semi submersible bp oil rig exploded in the gulf of mexico about miles off of the coast of louisiana. the explosion led to discharges between to barrels of oil per day. it took responders days to stop the spill at which point the rig had leaked an estimated. million barrels of oil into the gulf. over miles of shoreline on the gulf of mexico from texas to florida were impacted by the deepwater horizon spill. of the crew members present during the deepwater horizon oil spill died and were seriously injured. in addition the frequency of hurricanes in the gulf makes the effects of long term exposure on humans more applicable as these storms are capable of carrying crude oil over miles of ocean towards the shore. according to a research article from lsu damages to those living in the presence of crude oil the past years are likely permanent as chronic exposure leads to increased cancer risks cardiovascular issues and respiratory problems. oil exposure and its respiratory effects were also analyzed in a study on the coast guard personnel deployed to help clean up the spill. the article has. of responders stating they were exposed to crude oil and. stating they were exposed to oil dispersants. of the nearly personnel who completed the survey. experienced coughing. experienced shortness of breath and. experienced wheezing. the study also found that exposure to both oil and oil dispersants presented associations that were much stronger than oil alone for the different respiratory symptoms. the northeast gulf of mexico shoreline contains about percent of the coastal and freshwater marshes in the united states. a marsh environment tends to have standing water making it among the most sensitive habitats to oil spills. without the natural cleaning mechanism that flowing water provides oil is able to coat marsh vegetation for longer periods of time ruining nurseries that then impact a host of interconnected species. the gulf of mexico is also home to species of marine mammals. of these up to percent of all kemp s ridley sea turtles present during the spill ended up dying and the louisiana bottlenose dolphin ended up facing a percent decline in population. however because the bp oil spill occurred miles from any land it wasn t as damaging to ecosystems along the shore as other oil spills. however habitats along the shore were still exposed through balls of tar that would clump together and wash up on beaches impacting local wildlife. also the consequences that drifting plumes of oil had on the deep sea ecosystem is relatively unknown. in december the u. s. filed a complaint in district court against bp and several other defendants associated with the spill. the complaint resulted in a record setting settlement enforcing a. billion clean water act penalty on bp exploration production and up to. billion in natural resource damages. however by bp had successfully recuperated most of the billion lost in market value after the spill. this recovery was attributed to the company s inclination to continue exploring new oil resources despite the accident. between and bp s gulf of mexico oil rigs doubled and they began investing billion towards opportunities in alaska in. on the other hand a article from npr exhibited how fishing cities along the gulf coast are still feeling harmful effects of the oil spill. in an interview with an oysterman from alabama he states business is still struggling... because of the lack of oyster production... i place the blame for that on the oil spill. the fisherman goes on to describe how the oyster reefs off of louisiana have not been producing like they should since the spill. water pollution in the city of woburn massachusetts gained public recognition in the lawsuit filed by the families of children in woburn who had died from leukemia in unusually high numbers. the families attributed the leukemia to the town s polluted drinking water which had been contaminated over years of industry most notably the toxic compounds used by leather factories in the area. the martin county coal slurry spill occurred on october when a coal slurry broke into an abandoned mine and sent an estimated million gallons of slurry into the tug fork river. the spill polluted miles of the big sandy river and a water supply for over residents. on december a dike ruptured on the kingston fossil plant in roane county tennessee and released. billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry into the emory river. it was the largest fly ash release and worst coal ash related disaster in u. s. history. on august workers on the gold king mine in silverton colorado released million gallons of toxic wastewater when attempting to add a tap to the tailing pond for the mine. the wastewater carried unsafe levels of heavy metals with some parts of the river testing for hundreds of times over their limits. during the late century there was little federal government attention paid to what were considered to be local environmental and health problems. the only federal legislation to address water pollution during this era was the rivers and harbors act of. in the law congress prohibited the dumping of refuse debris that interfered with navigationbut other forms of pollution were not addressed. in to address oil spills in harbors congress passed the oil pollution act. the law provided for penalties in the event of oil spills but they were applicable only to vessels in coastal waters. in the s and s state water boards were created to monitor some aspects of water quality. even prior to the clean water act the united states public health service investigated reports of water borne disease. in the s the public health service tested drinking water quality at at public establishments in door county wisconsin having their own wells. the clean water act of was the first act of its kind to establish a broad regulatory framework for improving water quality in the united states. the cwa defines procedures for pollution control and developing criteria and standards for pollutants in surface water. the law authorizes the environmental protection agency to regulate surface water pollution in the united states in partnership with state agencies. prior to it was legal to discharge wastewater to surface waters without testing for or removing water pollutants. the cwa was amended in and to adjust the federal proportion of construction grant funding for local governments regulate municipal storm sewer discharges and to later establish the clean water state revolving fund. the fund provides low interest loans to improve municipal sewage treatment systems and finance other water quality improvements. under the cwa the national pollution discharge elimination system regulates permits for discharges into water bodies. the epa regulations require each facility to apply for a specific permit for its wastewater discharges and consequently require that each facility treat its wastewater. in addition to effluent limitations the permits include monitoring and reporting requirements which are used by epa and states to enforce the limitations. however over fifty percent of the rivers in the united states still violate pollution standards published by the states. cwa and npdes form the backbone of regulation for controlling surface water pollution in the united states. additional regulation exists on a state by state basis allowing for more stringent regulation for protected bodies of water. additional regulation may be enacted to limit pollution that comes from non point sources such as agriculture. in many watersheds non point sources are the principal cause of noncompliance with water quality standards. some economists questioned whether the law was delivering the promised results of cleaner rivers and lakes and whether benefits exceeded the costs to society. the united states government has spent over one trillion dollars trying to combat water pollution. in the cwa congress had declared that the nations waters were to be free of pollutants by only eleven years after enactment. in general water quality has improved nationwide since but not all pollution has been eliminated. between and there was a percent increase in the number of waterways that are safe for fishing. data supporting this finding is limited only percent of the united states waterways had been tested for contamination. categoriespollution is the introduction of contaminants into the natural environment that cause adverse change. pollution can take the form of chemical substances or energy such as noise heat or light. pollutants the components of pollution can be either foreign substances energies or naturally occurring contaminants. pollution is often classed as point source or nonpoint source pollution. in pollution killed million people worldwide. major forms of pollution include air pollution light pollution litter noise pollution plastic pollution soil contamination radioactive contamination thermal pollution visual pollution and water pollution. the major forms of pollution are listed below along with the particular contaminant relevant to each of them the major forms of pollution are also listed below in the pollution navigation box a pollutant is a waste material that pollutes air water or soil. three factors determine the severity of a pollutant its chemical nature the concentration the area affected and the persistence. air pollution comes from both natural and human made sources. however globally human made pollutants from combustion construction mining agriculture and warfare are increasingly significant in the air pollution equation. motor vehicle emissions are one of the leading causes of air pollution. china united states russia india mexico and japan are the world leaders in air pollution emissions. principal stationary pollution sources include chemical plants coal fired power plants oil refineries petrochemical plants nuclear waste disposal activity incinerators large livestock farms pvc factories metals production factories plastics factories and other heavy industry. agricultural air pollution comes from contemporary practices which include clear felling and burning of natural vegetation as well as spraying of pesticides and herbicidesabout million metric tons of hazardous wastes are generated each year. the united states alone produces about million metric tons. americans constitute less than of the worlds population but produce roughly of the worlds co and generate approximately of worlds waste. in china overtook the united states as the worlds biggest producer of co while still far behind based on per capita pollution. some of the more common soil contaminants are chlorinated hydrocarbons heavy metals mtbe zinc arsenic and benzene. in a series of press reports culminating in a book called fateful harvest unveiled a widespread practice of recycling industrial byproducts into fertilizer resulting in the contamination of the soil with various metals. ordinary municipal landfills are the source of many chemical substances entering the soil environment emanating from the wide variety of refuse accepted especially substances illegally discarded there or from pre landfills that may have been subject to little control in the u. s. or eu. there have also been some unusual releases of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins commonly called dioxins for simplicity such as tcdd. pollution can also be the consequence of a natural disaster. for example hurricanes often involve water contamination from sewage and petrochemical spills from ruptured boats or automobiles. larger scale and environmental damage is not uncommon when coastal oil rigs or refineries are involved. some sources of pollution such as nuclear power plants or oil tankers can produce widespread and potentially hazardous releases when accidents occur. in the case of noise pollution the dominant source class is the motor vehicle producing about ninety percent of all unwanted noise worldwide. carbon dioxide while vital for photosynthesis is sometimes referred to as pollution because raised levels of the gas in the atmosphere are affecting the earths climate. disruption of the environment can also highlight the connection between areas of pollution that would normally be classified separately such as those of water and air. recent studies have investigated the potential for long term rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide to cause slight but critical increases in the acidity of ocean waters and the possible effects of this on marine ecosystems. in february a report by the intergovernmental panel on climate change representing the work of scientists economists and policymakers from more than countries confirmed that humans have been the primary cause of global warming since. humans have ways to cut greenhouse gas emissions and avoid the consequences of global warming a major climate report concluded. but to change the climate the transition from fossil fuels like coal and oil needs to occur within decades according to the final report this year from the uns intergovernmental panel on climate change. adverse air quality can kill many organisms including humans. ozone pollution can cause respiratory disease cardiovascular disease throat inflammation chest pain and congestion. water pollution causes approximately deaths per day mostly due to contamination of drinking water by untreated sewage in developing countries. an estimated million indians have no access to a proper toilet over ten million people in india fell ill with waterborne illnesses in and people died most of them children. nearly million chinese lack access to safe drinking water. a analysis estimated that. million people died prematurely each year in china because of air pollution. the high smog levels china has been facing for a long time can do damage to civilians bodies and cause different diseases. the who estimated in that air pollution causes half a million deaths per year in india. studies have estimated that the number of people killed annually in the united states could be over. oil spills can cause skin irritations and rashes. noise pollution induces hearing loss high blood pressure stress and sleep disturbance. mercury has been linked to developmental deficits in children and neurologic symptoms. older people are majorly exposed to diseases induced by air pollution. those with heart or lung disorders are at additional risk. children and infants are also at serious risk. lead and other heavy metals have been shown to cause neurological problems. chemical and radioactive substances can cause cancer and as well as birth defects. an october study by the lancet commission on pollution and health found that global pollution specifically toxic air water soils and workplaces kills nine million people annually which is triple the number of deaths caused by aids tuberculosis and malaria combined and times higher than deaths caused by wars and other forms of human violence. the study concluded that pollution is one of the great existential challenges of the anthropocene era. pollution endangers the stability of the earth s support systems and threatens the continuing survival of human societies. pollution has been found to be present widely in the environment. there are a number of effects of this the toxicology and environmental health information program at the united states national library of medicine maintains a comprehensive toxicology and environmental health web site that includes access to resources produced by tehip and by other government agencies and organizations. this web site includes links to databases bibliographies tutorials and other scientific and consumer oriented resources. tehip also is responsible for the toxicology data network an integrated system of toxicology and environmental health databases that are available free of charge on the web. toxmap is a geographic information system that is part of toxnet. toxmap uses maps of the united states to help users visually explore data from the united states environmental protection agencys toxics release inventory and superfund basic research programs. a study found that exposure to pollution causes an increase in violent crime. a paper linked pollution to adverse school outcomes for children. a number of studies show that pollution has an adverse effect on the productivity of both indoor and outdoor workers. to protect the environment from the adverse effects of pollution many nations worldwide have enacted legislation to regulate various types of pollution as well as to mitigate the adverse effects of pollution. pollution control is a term used in environmental management. it means the control of emissions and effluents into air water or soil. without pollution control the waste products from overconsumption heating agriculture mining manufacturing transportation and other human activities whether they accumulate or disperse will degrade the environment. in the hierarchy of controls pollution prevention and waste minimization are more desirable than pollution control. in the field of land development low impact development is a similar technique for the prevention of urban runoff. pollution has a cost. manufacturing activities that cause air pollution impose health and clean up costs on the whole of society. a manufacturing activity that causes air pollution is an example of a negative externality in production. a negative externality in production occurs when a firm s production reduces the well being of others who are not compensated by the firm. for example if a laundry firm exists near a polluting steel manufacturing firm there will be increased costs for the laundry firm because of the dirt and smoke produced by the steel manufacturing firm. if external costs exist such as those created by pollution the manufacturer will choose to produce more of the product than would be produced if the manufacturer were required to pay all associated environmental costs. because responsibility or consequence for self directed action lies partly outside the self an element of externalization is involved. if there are external benefits such as in public safety less of the good may be produced than would be the case if the producer were to receive payment for the external benefits to others. however goods and services that involve negative externalities in production such as those that produce pollution tend to be over produced and underpriced since the externality is not being priced into the market. pollution can also create costs for the firms producing the pollution. sometimes firms choose or are forced by regulation to reduce the amount of pollution that they are producing. the associated costs of doing this are called abatement costs or marginal abatement costs if measured by each additional unit. in pollution abatement capital expenditures and operating costs in the us amounted to nearly billion. the pure earth an international non for profit organization dedicated to eliminating life threatening pollution in the developing world issues an annual list of some of the worlds most polluting industries. below is the list for a report by the institute for agriculture and trade policy and grain says that the meat and dairy industries are poised to surpass the oil industry as the worlds worst polluters. pure earth issues an annual list of some of the worlds worst polluted places. below is the list for society derives some indirect utility from pollution otherwise there would be no incentive to pollute. this utility comes from the consumption of goods and services that create pollution. therefore it is important that policymakers attempt to balance these indirect benefits with the costs of pollution in order to achieve an efficient outcome. it is possible to use environmental economics to determine which level of pollution is deemed the social optimum. for economists pollution is an external cost and occurs only when one or more individuals suffer a loss of welfare however there exists a socially optimal level of pollution at which welfare is maximized. this is because consumers derive utility from the good or service manufactured which will outweigh the social cost of pollution until a certain point. at this point the damage of one extra unit of pollution to society the marginal cost of pollution is exactly equal to the marginal benefit of consuming one more unit of the good or service. in markets with pollution or other negative externalities in production the free market equilibrium will not account for the costs of pollution on society. if the social costs of pollution are higher than the private costs incurred by the firm then the true supply curve will be higher. the point at which the social marginal cost and market demand intersect gives the socially optimal level of pollution. at this point the quantity will be lower and the price will be higher in comparison to the free market equilibrium. therefore the free market outcome could be considered a market failure because it does not maximize efficiency. this model can be used as a basis to evaluate different methods of internalizing the externality. some examples include tariffs a carbon tax and cap and trade systems. the earliest precursor of pollution generated by life forms would have been a natural function of their existence. the attendant consequences on viability and population levels fell within the sphere of natural selection. these would have included the demise of a population locally or ultimately species extinction. processes that were untenable would have resulted in a new balance brought about by changes and adaptations. at the extremes for any form of life consideration of pollution is superseded by that of survival. for humankind the factor of technology is a distinguishing and critical consideration both as an enabler and an additional source of byproducts. short of survival human concerns include the range from quality of life to health hazards. since science holds experimental demonstration to be definitive modern treatment of toxicity or environmental harm involves defining a level at which an effect is observable. common examples of fields where practical measurement is crucial include automobile emissions control industrial exposure pels toxicology and medicine. the solution to pollution is dilution is a dictum which summarizes a traditional approach to pollution management whereby sufficiently diluted pollution is not harmful. it is well suited to some other modern locally scoped applications such as laboratory safety procedure and hazardous material release emergency management. but it assumes that the diluent is in virtually unlimited supply for the application or that resulting dilutions are acceptable in all cases. such simple treatment for environmental pollution on a wider scale might have had greater merit in earlier centuries when physical survival was often the highest imperative human population and densities were lower technologies were simpler and their byproducts more benign. but these are often no longer the case. furthermore advances have enabled measurement of concentrations not possible before. the use of statistical methods in evaluating outcomes has given currency to the principle of probable harm in cases where assessment is warranted but resorting to deterministic models is impractical or infeasible. in addition consideration of the environment beyond direct impact on human beings has gained prominence. yet in the absence of a superseding principle this older approach predominates practices throughout the world. it is the basis by which to gauge concentrations of effluent for legal release exceeding which penalties are assessed or restrictions applied. one such superseding principle is contained in modern hazardous waste laws in developed countries as the process of diluting hazardous waste to make it non hazardous is usually a regulated treatment process. migration from pollution dilution to elimination in many cases can be confronted by challenging economical and technological barriers. air pollution has always accompanied civilizations. pollution started from prehistoric times when man created the first fires. according to a article in the journal science soot found on ceilings of prehistoric caves provides ample evidence of the high levels of pollution that was associated with inadequate ventilation of open fires. metal forging appears to be a key turning point in the creation of significant air pollution levels outside the home. core samples of glaciers in greenland indicate increases in pollution associated with greek roman and chinese metal production. the burning of coal and wood and the presence of many horses in concentrated areas made the cities the primary sources of pollution. king edward i of england banned the burning of sea coal by proclamation in london in after its smoke became a problem the fuel was so common in england that this earliest of names for it was acquired because it could be carted away from some shores by the wheelbarrow. it was the industrial revolution that gave birth to environmental pollution as we know it today. london also recorded one of the earlier extreme cases of water quality problems with the great stink on the thames of which led to construction of the london sewerage system soon afterward. pollution issues escalated as population growth far exceeded viability of neighborhoods to handle their waste problem. reformers began to demand sewer systems and clean water. in the sanitary conditions in berlin were among the worst in europe. august bebel recalled conditions before a modern sewer system was built in the late s waste water from the houses collected in the gutters running alongside the curbs and emitted a truly fearsome smell. there were no public toilets in the streets or squares. visitors especially women often became desperate when nature called. in the public buildings the sanitary facilities were unbelievably primitive.... as a metropolis berlin did not emerge from a state of barbarism into civilization until after. the primitive conditions were intolerable for a world national capital and the imperial german government brought in its scientists engineers and urban planners to not only solve the deficiencies but to forge berlin as the worlds model city. a british expert in concluded that berlin represented the most complete application of science order and method of public life adding it is a marvel of civic administration the most modern and most perfectly organized city that there is. the emergence of great factories and consumption of immense quantities of coal gave rise to unprecedented air pollution and the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste. chicago and cincinnati were the first two american cities to enact laws ensuring cleaner air in. pollution became a major issue in the united states in the early twentieth century as progressive reformers took issue with air pollution caused by coal burning water pollution caused by bad sanitation and street pollution caused by the million horses who worked in american cities in generating large quantities of urine and manure. as historian martin melosi notes the generation that first saw automobiles replacing the horses saw cars as miracles of cleanliness. by the s however automobile caused smog was a major issue in los angeles. other cities followed around the country until early in the century when the short lived office of air pollution was created under the department of the interior. extreme smog events were experienced by the cities of los angeles and donora pennsylvania in the late s serving as another public reminder. air pollution would continue to be a problem in england especially later during the industrial revolution and extending into the recent past with the great smog of. awareness of atmospheric pollution spread widely after world war ii with fears triggered by reports of radioactive fallout from atomic warfare and testing. then a non nuclear event the great smog of in london killed at least people. this prompted some of the first major modern environmental legislation the clean air act of. pollution began to draw major public attention in the united states between the mid s and early s when congress passed the noise control act the clean air act the clean water act and the national environmental policy act. severe incidents of pollution helped increase consciousness. pcb dumping in the hudson river resulted in a ban by the epa on consumption of its fish in. national news stories in the late s especially the long term dioxin contamination at love canal starting in and uncontrolled dumping in valley of the drums led to the superfund legislation of. the pollution of industrial land gave rise to the name brownfield a term now common in city planning. the development of nuclear science introduced radioactive contamination which can remain lethally radioactive for hundreds of thousands of years. lake karachay named by the worldwatch institute as the most polluted spot on earth served as a disposal site for the soviet union throughout the s and s. chelyabinsk russia is considered the most polluted place on the planet. nuclear weapons continued to be tested in the cold war especially in the earlier stages of their development. the toll on the worst affected populations and the growth since then in understanding about the critical threat to human health posed by radioactivity has also been a prohibitive complication associated with nuclear power. though extreme care is practiced in that industry the potential for disaster suggested by incidents such as those at three mile island chernobyl and fukushima pose a lingering specter of public mistrust. worldwide publicity has been intense on those disasters. widespread support for test ban treaties has ended almost all nuclear testing in the atmosphere. international catastrophes such as the wreck of the amoco cadiz oil tanker off the coast of brittany in and the bhopal disaster in have demonstrated the universality of such events and the scale on which efforts to address them needed to engage. the borderless nature of atmosphere and oceans inevitably resulted in the implication of pollution on a planetary level with the issue of global warming. most recently the term persistent organic pollutant has come to describe a group of chemicals such as pbdes and pfcs among others. though their effects remain somewhat less well understood owing to a lack of experimental data they have been detected in various ecological habitats far removed from industrial activity such as the arctic demonstrating diffusion and bioaccumulation after only a relatively brief period of widespread use. a much more recently discovered problem is the great pacific garbage patch a huge concentration of plastics chemical sludge and other debris which has been collected into a large area of the pacific ocean by the north pacific gyre. this is a less well known pollution problem than the others described above but nonetheless has multiple and serious consequences such as increasing wildlife mortality the spread of invasive species and human ingestion of toxic chemicals. organizations such as gyres have researched the pollution and along with artists like marina debris are working toward publicizing the issue. pollution introduced by light at night is becoming a global problem more severe in urban centres but nonetheless contaminating also large territories far away from towns. growing evidence of local and global pollution and an increasingly informed public over time have given rise to environmentalism and the environmental movement which generally seek to limit human impact on the environment. air pollutionsoil contaminationwater pollutionotherplastic pollution in ghana plastic pollution on the remote island of maui hawaiicategoriesplastic pollution is the accumulation of plastic objects and particles in the earths environment that adversely affects wildlife wildlife habitat and humans. plastics that act as pollutants are categorized by size into micro meso or macro debris. plastics are inexpensive and durable making them very adaptable for different uses as a result humans produce a lot of plastic. however the chemical structure of most plastics renders them resistant to many natural processes of degradation and as a result they are slow to degrade. together these two factors allow large volumes of plastic to enter the environment as mismanaged waste and for it to persist in the ecosystem. plastic pollution can afflict land waterways and oceans. it is estimated that. to. million tonnes of plastic waste enters the ocean from coastal communities each year. it is estimated that there is a stock of million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of with an assumption that. of global plastics produced from to has entered the ocean and has accumulated there. some researchers suggest that by there could be more plastic than fish in the oceans by weight. living organisms particularly marine animals can be harmed either by mechanical effects such as entanglement in plastic objects problems related to ingestion of plastic waste or through exposure to chemicals within plastics that interfere with their physiology. degraded plastic waste can directly affect humans through both direct consumption indirect consumption and disruption of various hormonal mechanisms. as of million tonnes of plastic is produced each year in asia where china is the worlds largest producer. from the s up to an estimated. billion tonnes of plastic has been produced worldwide of which an estimated has been recycled and another has been incinerated. this large amount of plastic waste enters the environment with studies suggesting that the bodies of of seabirds contain plastic debris. in some areas there have been significant efforts to reduce the prominence of free range plastic pollution through reducing plastic consumption litter cleanup and promoting plastic recycling. as of the global mass of produced plastic exceeds the biomass of all land and marine animals combined. a may amendment to the basel convention regulates the exportation importation of plastic waste largely intended to prevent the shipping of plastic waste from developed countries to developing countries. nearly all countries have joined this agreement. the trade in plastic waste has been identified as a main culprit of marine litter. countries importing the waste plastics often lack the capacity to process all the material. as a result the united nations has imposed a ban on waste plastic trade unless it meets certain criteria. there are three major forms of plastic that contribute to plastic pollution micro macro and mega plastics. mega and micro plastics have accumulated in highest densities in the northern hemisphere concentrated around urban centers and water fronts. plastic can be found off the coast of some islands because of currents carrying the debris. both mega and macro plastics are found in packaging footwear and other domestic items that have been washed off of ships or discarded in landfills. fishing related items are more likely to be found around remote islands. these may also be referred to as micro meso and macro debris. plastic debris is categorized as either primary or secondary. primary plastics are in their original form when collected. examples of these would be bottle caps cigarette butts and microbeads. secondary plastics on the other hand account for smaller plastics that have resulted from the degradation of primary plastics. microdebris are plastic pieces between mm and mm in size. plastic debris that starts off as meso or macrodebris can become microdebris through degradation and collisions that break it down into smaller pieces. microdebris is more commonly referred to as nurdles. nurdles are recycled to make new plastic items but they easily end up released into the environment during production because of their small size. they often end up in ocean waters through rivers and streams. microdebris that come from cleaning and cosmetic products are also referred to as scrubbers. because microdebris and scrubbers are so small in size filter feeding organisms often consume them. nurdles enter the ocean by means of spills during transportation or from land based sources. the ocean conservancy reported that china indonesia philippines thailand and vietnam dump more plastic in the sea than all other countries combined. it is estimated that of the plastics in the ocean are nurdles making them one of the most common types of plastic pollution along with plastic bags and food containers. these micro plastics can accumulate in the oceans and allow for the accumulation of persistent bio accumulating toxins such as bisphenol a polystyrene ddt and pcbs which are hydrophobic in nature and can cause adverse health affects. a study by richard thompson from the university of plymouth uk found a great amount of microdebris on the beaches and waters in europe the americas australia africa and antarctica. thompson and his associates found that plastic pellets from both domestic and industrial sources were being broken down into much smaller plastic pieces some having a diameter smaller than human hair. if not ingested this microdebris floats instead of being absorbed into the marine environment. thompson predicts there may be plastic items per square kilometre of sea surface and plastic particles per square kilometre of seabed. international pellet watch collected samples of polythene pellets from beaches from countries which were then analysed for organic micro pollutants. it was found that pellets found on beaches in the u. s. vietnam and southern africa contained compounds from pesticides suggesting a high use of pesticides in the areas. in scientists created what may be the first scientific estimate of how much microplastic currently resides in earths seafloor after investigating six areas of km depth km off the australian coast. they found the highly variable microplastic counts to be proportionate to plastic on the surface and the angle of the seafloor slope. by averaging the microplastic mass per cm they estimated that earths seafloor contains million tons of microplastic about double the amount they estimated based on data from earlier studies despite calling both estimates conservative as coastal areas are known to contain much more microplastic. these estimates are about one to two times the amount of plastic thought per jambeck et al. to currently enter the oceans annually. plastic debris is categorized as macrodebris when it is larger than mm. these include items such as plastic grocery bags. macrodebris are often found in ocean waters and can have a serious impact on the native organisms. fishing nets have been prime pollutants. even after they have been abandoned they continue to trap marine organisms and other plastic debris. eventually these abandoned nets become too difficult to remove from the water because they become too heavy having grown in weight up to tonnes. plastics themselves contribute to approximately of discarded waste. many kinds of plastics exist depending on their precursors and the method for their polymerization. depending on their chemical composition plastics and resins have varying properties related to contaminant absorption and adsorption. polymer degradation takes much longer as a result of saline environments and the cooling effect of the sea. these factors contribute to the persistence of plastic debris in certain environments. recent studies have shown that plastics in the ocean decompose faster than was once thought due to exposure to sun rain and other environmental conditions resulting in the release of toxic chemicals such as bisphenol a. however due to the increased volume of plastics in the ocean decomposition has slowed down. the marine conservancy has predicted the decomposition rates of several plastic products. it is estimated that a foam plastic cup will take years a plastic beverage holder will take years a disposable nappy will take years and fishing line will take years to degrade. it was estimated that global production of plastics is approximately mt yr. their abundance has been found to transport persistent organic pollutants also known as pops. these pollutants have been linked to an increased distribution of algae associated with red tides. in the group break free from plastic organized over volunteers in countries to collect and identify plastic waste. these volunteers collected over plastic bags sachets and plastic bottles as reported by the guardian. nearly half of the items were identifiable by consumer brands. the most common brands were coca cola nestl and pepsico. according to the global campaign coordinator for the project emma priestland in the only way to solve the problem is stopping production of single use plastic and using reusable products instead. china is the biggest consumer of single use plastics. coca cola answered that more than of our portfolio comes in refillable or fountain packaging they are decreasing the amount of plastic in secondary packaging. nestl responded that of their packaging and of their plastic packaging can be reused or recycled and by they want to make it. by that year they want to reduce the consumption of virgin plastic by one third. pepsico responded that they want to decrease virgin plastic in our beverage business by by and also expanding reuse and refill practices what should prevent billion single use bottles by. top mismanaged plastic waste pollutersin approximate million tonnes of plastics wind up in the oceans every year out of which the is from the following countries china is the most mismanaged plastic waste polluter leaving in the sea the. of the world total second indonesia with the. third philippines with. fourth vietnam with. fifth sri lanka. sixth thailand with. seventh egypt with. eighth malaysia with. ninth nigeria with. tenth bangladesh with. eleventh south africa with. twelfth india with. thirteenth algeria with. fourteenth turkey with. fifteenth pakistan with. sixteenth brazil with. seventeenth myanmar with. eighteenth morocco with. nineteenth north korea with. twentieth united states with.. the rest of worlds countries combined wind up the. of the mismanaged plastic waste in the oceans according to a study published by science jambeck et al. in a new study revised the potential u. s. contribution to mismanaged plastic. it estimated an annual.. metric tons was mismanaged in the countries to which the u. s. exported plastics for recycling and an. and. metric tons was illegally dumped in the u. s. itself. thus the amount of u. s. generated plastic estimated to enter the ocean environment could range as high as. mt placing the u. s. behind indonesia and india in oceanic pollution or as low as. mt placing the u. s. behind indonesia india thailand china brazil philippines egypt japan russia and vietnam. the authors noted that sincehina ceased importing plastics for recycling and since international treaties restricted the export of plastics for recycling. all the european union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list. a study calculated the mismanaged plastic waste in millions of metric tonnes per year around million tonnes of plastic waste is generated each year around the world between. million and. million tonnes is dumped into the sea. about of the plastic waste in the ocean comes from the following top countries. the table below list the top plastic waste polluting countries in according to a study published by science jambeck et al. all the european union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list. in a study published by environmental science technology schmidt et al calculated that rivers two in africa and eight in asia transport of the global plastics load into the sea.. the caribbean islands are the biggest plastic polluters per capita in the world. trinidad and tobago produces. kilograms of waste per capita per day is the biggest plastic polluter per capita in the world. at least. kg per person per day of trinidad and tobagos plastic debris end up in the ocean or for example saint lucia which generates more than four times the amount of plastic waste per capita as china and is responsible for. times more improperly disposed plastic waste per capita than china. of the top thirty global polluters per capita ten are from the caribbean region. these are trinidad and tobago antigua and barbuda saint kitts and nevis guyana barbados saint lucia bahamas grenada anguilla and aruba according to a set of studies summarized by forbes. the distribution of plastic debris is highly variable as a result of certain factors such as wind and ocean currents coastline geography urban areas and trade routes. human population in certain areas also plays a large role in this. plastics are more likely to be found in enclosed regions such as the caribbean. it serves as a means of distribution of organisms to remote coasts that are not their native environments. this could potentially increase the variability and dispersal of organisms in specific areas that are less biologically diverse. plastics can also be used as vectors for chemical contaminants such as persistent organic pollutants and heavy metals. in a new report plastic and climate was published. according to the report in production and incineration of plastic will contribute greenhouse gases in the equivalent of million tonnes of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. in current trend annual emissions from these sources will grow to. billion tonnes by. by plastic could emit billion tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions as much as percent of the earths remaining carbon budget. by it will emit billion tonnes more than half of the carbon budget. those are emission from production transportation incineration but there are also releases of methane and effects on phytoplankton. plastic pollution on land poses a threat to the plants and animals including humans who are based on the land. estimates of the amount of plastic concentration on land are between four and twenty three times that of the ocean. the amount of plastic poised on the land is greater and more concentrated than that in the water. mismanaged plastic waste ranges from percent in east asia and pacific to one percent in north america. the percentage of mismanaged plastic waste reaching the ocean annually and thus becoming plastic marine debris is between one third and one half the total mismanaged waste for that year. chlorinated plastic can release harmful chemicals into the surrounding soil which can then seep into groundwater or other surrounding water sources and also the ecosystem of the world. this can cause serious harm to the species that drink the water. a study found that of tap water samples taken around the world contained plastic pollutants. this was the first study to focus on global drinking water pollution with plastics and showed that with a contamination rate of tap water in the united states was the most polluted followed by lebanon and india. european countries such as the united kingdom germany and france had the lowest contamination rate though still as high as. this means that people may be ingesting between and microparticles of plastic from tap water per year. the analysis found particles of more than. microns in size which is times bigger than a nanometer. it is currently unclear if this contamination is affecting human health but if the water is also found to contain nano particle pollutants there could be adverse impacts on human well being according to scientists associated with the study. however plastic tap water pollution remains under studied as are the links of how pollution transfers between humans air water and soil. plastic waste can clog storm drains and such clogging can increase flood damage particularly in urban areas. for example in bangkok flood risk increases substantially because of plastic waste clogging the already overburdened sewer system. marine plastic pollution is a type of marine pollution by plastics ranging in size from large original material such as bottles and bags down to microplastics formed from the fragmentation of plastic material. marine debris is mainly discarded human rubbish which floats on or is suspended in the ocean. eighty percent of marine debris is plastic. microplastics and nanoplastics result from the breakdown or photodegradation of plastic waste in surface waters rivers or oceans. it is estimated that there is a stock of million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of assuming that. of global plastics produced from to has entered the ocean and has accumulated there. the united nations ocean conference estimated that the oceans might contain more weight in plastics than fish by the yearompounds that are used in manufacturing pollute the environment by releasing chemicals into the air and water. some compounds that are used in plastics such as phthalates bisphenol a polybrominated diphenyl ether are under close statute and might be very hurtful. even though these compounds are unsafe they have been used in the manufacturing of food packaging medical devices flooring materials bottles perfumes cosmetics and much more. the large dosage of these compounds are hazardous to humans destroying the endocrine system. bra imitates the females hormone called estrogen. pbd destroys and causes damage to thyroid hormones which are vital hormone glands that play a major role in the metabolism growth and development of the human body. although the level of exposure to these chemicals varies depending on age and geography most humans experience simultaneous exposure to many of these chemicals. average levels of daily exposure are below the levels deemed to be unsafe but more research needs to be done on the effects of low dose exposure on humans. a lot is unknown on how severely humans are physically affected by these chemicals. some of the chemicals used in plastic production can cause dermatitis upon contact with human skin. in many plastics these toxic chemicals are only used in trace amounts but significant testing is often required to ensure that the toxic elements are contained within the plastic by inert material or polymer. children and women during their reproduction age are at most at risk and more prone to damaging their immune as well as their reproductive system from these hormone disrupting chemicals. it can also affect humans because it may create an eyesore that interferes with enjoyment of the natural environment. due to the pervasiveness of plastic products most of the human population is constantly exposed to the chemical components of plastics. of adults in the united states have had detectable levels of bpa in their urine. exposure to chemicals such as bpa have been correlated with disruptions in fertility reproduction sexual maturation and other health effects. specific phthalates have also resulted in similar biological effects. bisphenol a affects gene expression related to the thyroid hormone axis which affects biological functions such as metabolism and development. bpa can decrease thyroid hormone receptor activity by increasing tr transcriptional corepressor activity. this then decreases the level of thyroid hormone binding proteins that bind to triiodothyronine. by affecting the thyroid hormone axis bpa exposure can lead to hypothyroidism. bpa can disrupt normal physiological levels of sex hormones. it does this by binding to globulins that normally bind to sex hormones such as androgens and estrogens leading to the disruption of the balance between the two. bpa can also affect the metabolism or the catabolism of sex hormones. it often acts as an antiandrogen or as an estrogen which can cause disruptions in gonadal development and sperm production. efforts to reduce the use of plastics to promote plastic recycling and to reduce mismanaged plastic waste or plastic pollution have occurred or are ongoing. the first scientific review in the professional academic literature about global plastic pollution in general found that the rational response to the global threat would be reductions in consumption of virgin plastic materials along with internationally coordinated strategies for waste management such as banning export of plastic waste unless it leads to better recycling and describes the state of knowledge about poorly reversible impacts which are one of the rationales for its reduction. some supermarkets charge their customers for plastic bags and in some places more efficient reusable or biodegradable materials are being used in place of plastics. some communities and businesses have put a ban on some commonly used plastic items such as bottled water and plastic bags. some non governmental organizations have launched voluntary plastic reduction schemes like certificates that can be adapted by restaurants to be recognized as eco friendly among customers. in january a global alliance to end plastic waste was created by companies in the plastics industry. the alliance aims to clean the environment from existing waste and increase recycling but it does not mention reduction in plastic production as one of its targets. the use of biodegradable plastics has many advantages and disadvantages. biodegradables are biopolymers that degrade in industrial composters. biodegradables do not degrade as efficiently in domestic composters and during this slower process methane gas may be emitted. there are also other types of degradable materials that are not considered to be biopolymers because they are oil based similar to other conventional plastics. these plastics are made to be more degradable through the use of different additives which help them degrade when exposed to uv rays or other physical stressors. yet biodegradation promoting additives for polymers have been shown not to significantly increase biodegradation. although biodegradable and degradable plastics have helped reduce plastic pollution there are some drawbacks. one issue concerning both types of plastics is that they do not break down very efficiently in natural environments. there degradable plastics that are oil based may break down into smaller fractions at which point they do not degrade further. a parliamentary committee in the united kingdom also found that compostable and biodegradable plastics could add to marine pollution because there is a lack of infrastructure to deal with these new types of plastic as well as a lack of understanding about them on the part of consumers. for example these plastics need to be sent to industrial composting facilities to degrade properly but no adequate system exists to make sure waste reaches these facilities. the committee thus recommended to reduce the amount of plastic used rather than introducing new types of it to the market. up to of used plastic medical equipment is incinerated rather than deposited in a landfill as a precautionary measure to lessen the transmission of disease. this has allowed for a large decrease in the amount of plastic waste that stems from medical equipment. at a large scale plastics paper and other materials provides waste to energy plants with useful fuel. about of total produced plastic has been incinerated. many studies have been done concerning the gaseous emissions that result from the incineration process. incinerated plastics release a number of toxins in the burning process including dioxins furans mercury and polychlorinated biphenyls. when burned outside of facilities designed to collect or process the toxins this can have significant health effects and create significant air pollution. agencies such as the us environmental protection agency and us food and drug administration often do not assess the safety of new chemicals until after a negative side effect is shown. once they suspect a chemical may be toxic it is studied to determine the human reference dose which is determined to be the lowest observable adverse effect level. during these studies a high dose is tested to see if it causes any adverse health effects and if it does not lower doses are considered to be safe as well. this does not take into account the fact that with some chemicals found in plastics such as bpa lower doses can have a discernible effect. even with this often complex evaluation process policies have been put into place in order to help alleviate plastic pollution and its effects. government regulations have been implemented that ban some chemicals from being used in specific plastic products. in canada the united states and the european union bpa has been banned from being incorporated in the production of baby bottles and childrens cups due to health concerns and the higher vulnerability of younger children to the effects of bpa. taxes have been established in order to discourage specific ways of managing plastic waste. the landfill tax for example creates an incentive to choose to recycle plastics rather than contain them in landfills by making the latter more expensive. there has also been a standardization of the types of plastics that can be considered compostable. the european norm en which was set by the european committee for standardization lists the standards that plastics must meet in terms of compostability and biodegradability in order to officially be labeled as compostable. given the significant threat that oceans face the european investment bank group aims to increase its funding and advisory assistance for ocean cleanup. for example the clean oceans initiative was established in. the european investment bank the german development bank and the french development agency agreed to invest a total of billion under the coi from october to october in initiatives aimed at reducing pollution discharge into the oceans with a special focus on plastics. major plastic producers continue to lobby governments to refrain from imposing restrictions on plastic production and to advocate for voluntary corporate targets to reduce new plastic output. however the worlds top plastic producers including the coca cola company nestle sa and pepsico have been failing to meet even their own minimum targets for virgin plastic use. there have been several international covenants which address marine plastic pollution such as the convention on the prevention of marine pollution by dumping of wastes and other matter the international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships and the honolulu strategy there is nothing around plastics which infiltrate the ocean from the land. in countries agreed to limit the amount of plastic waste that rich countries export to poorer countries using rules from the basel convention. however during january the first month that the agreement was in effect trade data showed that overall scrap exports actually increased. some academics and ngos believe that a legally binding international treaty to deal with plastic pollution is necessary. they think this because plastic pollution is an international problem moving between maritime borders and also because they believe there needs to be a cap on plastic production. lobbyists were hoping that unea would lead to a plastics treaty but the session ended without a legally binding agreement. the canadian federal government formed a current institution that protects marine areas this includes the mitigation of plastic pollution. in canada adopted legislation for oceans management and passed the oceans act. federal governance regional governance and aboriginal peoples are the actors involved in the process of decision making and implementation of the decision. the regional governance bodies are federal provincial and territorial government agencies that hold responsibilities of the marine environment. aboriginal peoples in canada have treaty and non treaty rights related to ocean activities. according to the canadian government they respect these rights and work with aboriginal groups in oceans management activities. with the oceans act made legal canada made a commitment to conserve and protect the oceans. the ocean acts underlying principle is sustainable development precautionary and integrated management approach to ensure that there is a comprehensive understanding in protecting marine areas. in the integrated management approach the oceans act designates federal responsibility to the minister of fisheries and oceans canada for any new and emerging ocean related activities. the act encourages collaboration and coordination within the government that unifies interested parties. moreover the oceans act engages any canadians who are interested in being informed of the decision making regarding ocean environment. in federal organizations developed the federal marine protected areas strategy. this strategy is a collaborative approach implemented by fisheries and oceans canada parks canada and environment canada to plan and manage federal marine protected areas. the federal marine protected areas work with aboriginal groups industries academia environmental groups and ngos to strengthen marine protected areas. the federal marine protected areas network consists of three core programs marine protected areas marine wildlife areas and national marine conservation areas. the mpa is a program to be noted because it is significant in protecting ecosystems from the effects of industrial activities. the mpa guiding principles are integrated management ecosystem based management approach adaptive management approach precautionary principle and flexible management approach. all five guiding principles are used collectively and simultaneously to collaborate and respect legislative mandates of individual departments to use scientific knowledge and traditional ecological knowledge to manage human activities to monitor and report on programs to meet conservation objectives of mpas to use best available information in the absence of scientific certainty and to maintain a balance between conservation needs and sustainable development objectives. inanadas government officially recognize plastic as toxic material what creates the possibility to limit its consumption in different ways. the two common forms of waste collection include curbside collection and the use of drop off recycling centers. about percent of the population in the united states have access to curbside and drop off recycling centers. in curbside collection which is available to about percent of the united states population people place designated plastics in a special bin to be picked up by a public or private hauling company. most curbside programs collect more than one type of plastic resin usually both pete and hdpe. at drop off recycling centers which are available to percent of the united states population people take their recyclables to a centrally located facility. once collected the plastics are delivered to a materials recovery facility or handler for sorting into single resin streams to increase product value. the sorted plastics are then baled to reduce shipping costs to reclaimers. there are varying rates of recycling per type of plastic and in the overall plastic recycling rate was approximately. in the united states. approximately. million tonnes of plastics were recycled in the u. s. in while. million tonnes plastic were dumped in landfills the same year. some plastics are recycled more than others in about. percent of hdpe bottles and. percent of pet bottles and jars were recycled. in may a new service model called loop to collect packaging from consumers and reuse it began to function in the new york region us. consumers drop packages in special shipping totes and then a pick up collect them. partners include procter gamble nestl pepsico unilever mars petcare the clorox company the body shop coca cola mondelz danone and other firms. it has begun with several thousand households but there are on the waiting list. the target of the service is not only stop single use plastic but to stop single use generally by recycling consumer product containers of various materials. the organization the ocean cleanup is trying to collect plastic waste from the oceans by nets. there are concerns from harm to some forms of sea organisms especially neuston. in the european union adopted a directive requiring a reduction in the consumption of single use plastic bags per person to by the year and to by the year. in april the eu adopted a further directive banning almost all types of single use plastic except bottles from the beginning of the yearhina is the biggest consumer of single use plastics. inhina published a plan to cut of plastic waste in years. as part of this plan single use plastic bags and straws will be bannedthe government of india decided to ban single use plastics and take a number of measures to recycle and reuse plastic from october the ministry of drinking water and sanitation government of india has requested various governmental departments to avoid the use of plastic bottles to provide drinking water during governmental meetings etc. and to instead make arrangements for providing drinking water that do not generate plastic waste. the state of sikkim has restricted the usage of plastic water bottles and styrofoam products. the state of bihar has banned the usage of plastic water bottles in governmental meetings. the national games of india organised in thiruvananthapuram was associated with green protocols. this was initiated by suchitwa mission that aimed for zero waste venues. to make the event disposable free there was ban on the usage of disposable water bottles. the event witnessed the usage of reusable tableware and stainless steel tumblers. athletes were provided with refillable steel flasks. it is estimated that these green practices stopped the generation of tonnes of disposable waste. the city of bangalore in banned the plastic for all purpose other than for few special cases like milk delivery etc. the state of maharashtra india effected the maharashtra plastic and thermocol products ban june subjecting plastic users to fines and potential imprisonment for repeat offenders. in july albania became the first country in europe to ban lightweight plastic bags. albanias environment minister blendi klosi said that businesses importing producing or trading plastic bags less than microns in thickness risk facing fines between million to. million lek. in bali a pair of two sisters melati and isabel wijsen have gone through efforts to ban plastic bags in. their organization bye bye plastic bags has spread to locations around the world. in washington university in st. louis became the first university in the united states to ban the sale of plastic single use water bottles. in district of columbia required all businesses that sell food or alcohol to charge an additional cents for each carryout plastic or paper bag. in and kauai maui and hawaii prohibit non biodegradable plastic bags at checkout as well as paper bags containing less than percent recycled material. in honolulu was the last major county approving the ban. in california prohibited large stores from providing plastic bags and if so a charge of. per bag and has to meet certain criteria. in illinois adopted the legislation and established recycle thin film friday in effort toe reclaim used thin film plastic bags and encourage reusable bags. in the new york banned single use plastic bags and introduced a cent fee for using single use paper bags. the ban will enter into force in. this will not only reduce plastic bag usage in new york state but also eliminate million barrels of oil used to make plastic bags used by the state each year. the state of maine ban styrofoam containers in may. in the giant eagle retailer became the first big us retailer that committed to completely phase out plastic by. the first step stop using single use plastic bags will begun to be implemented already on january. in delaware maine oregon and vermont enacted on legislation. vermont also restricted single use straws and polystyrene containers. in connecticut imposed a. charge on single use plastic bags at point of sale and is going to ban them on july. in the house of representatives of nigeria banned the production import and usage of plastic bags in the country. in israel cities eilat and herzliya decided to ban the usage of single use plastic bags and cutlery on the beaches. in tel aviv joined them banning also the sale of single use plastic on the beaches. in january the iceland supermarket chain which specializes in frozen foods pledged to eliminate or drastically reduce all plastic packaging for its store brand products by. as of communities achieved the title of plastic free community in united kingdom want to achieve it. after schoolgirls ella and caitlin launched a petition about it burger king and mcdonalds in the united kingdom and ireland pledged to stop sending plastic toys with their meals. mcdonalds pledged to do it from the year. mcdonalds also pledged to use a paper wrap for it meals and books that will be sent with the meals. the transmission will begin already in march. kenyain august kenya has one of the worlds harshest plastic bag bans. fines of or up to four years in jail to anyone that was caught producing selling or using a plastic bag. vanuatuon july vanuatu s independence day made an announcement of stepping towards the beginning of not using plastic bags and bottles. making it one of the first pacific nations to do so and will start banning the importation of single use plastic bottles and bags. taiwanin february taiwan restricted the use of single use plastic cups straws utensils and bags the ban will also include an extra charge for plastic bags and updates their recycling regulations and aiming by it would be completely enforced. the country announced a ban on many types of hard to recycle single use plastic by the ten corporations that produce the most plastic on the planet the coca cola company colgate palmolive danone mars incorporated mondelz international nestl pepsico perfetti van melle procter gamble and unilever formed a well financed network that has sabotaged for decades government and community efforts to address the plastic pollution crisis according to a detailed investigative report by the changing markets foundation. the investigation documents how these companies delay and derail legislation so that they can continue to inundate consumers with disposable plastic packaging. these large plastic producers have exploited public fears of the covid pandemic to work toward delaying and reversing existing regulation of plastic disposal. big ten plastic producers have advanced voluntary commitments for plastic waste disposal as a stratagem to deter governments from imposing additional regulations. as early as the early s petrochemical industry leaders understood that the vast majority of plastic they produced would never be recycled. for example an april report written by industry scientists for industry executive states that sorting the hundreds of different kinds plastic is infeasible and cost prohibitive. by the late s industry leaders also knew that the public must be kept feeling good about purchasing plastic products if their industry was to continue to prosper and needed to quell proposed legislation to regulate the plastic being sold. so the industry launched a million year corporate propaganda campaign targeting the american public with the message that plastic can be and is being recycled and lobbied american municipalities to launch expensive plastic waste collection programs and lobbied u. s. states to require the labeling of plastic products and containers with recycling symbols. they were confident however that the recycling initiatives would not end up recovering and reusing plastic in amounts anywhere near sufficient to hurt their profits in selling new virgin plastic products because they understood that the recycling efforts that they were promoting were likely to fail. industry leaders more recently have planned recycling of the plastic they produce by calling for more efficient collection sorting and processing. in the earth day network partnered with keep america beautiful and national cleanup day for the inaugural nationwide earth day cleanup. cleanups were held in all states five us territories sites and had more than volunteers. earth day is the anniversary of earth day. celebrations will include activities such as the great global cleanup citizen science advocacy education and art. this earth day aims to educate and mobilize more than one billion people to grow and support the next generation of environmental activists with a major focus on plastic wasteevery year june is observed as world environment day to raise awareness and increase government action on the pressing issue. in india was host to the world environment day and the theme was beat plastic pollution with a focus on single use or disposable plastic. the ministry of environment forest and climate change of india invited people to take care of their social responsibility and urged them to take up green good deeds in everyday life. several states presented plans to ban plastic or drastically reduce their use. on april in order to create awareness artist maria cristina finucci founded the garbage patch state at unesco headquarters in paris france in front of director general irina bokova. this was the first of a series of events under the patronage of unesco and of the italian ministry of the environment. categoriessoil contamination soil pollution or land pollution as a part of land degradation is caused by the presence of xenobiotic chemicals or other alteration in the natural soil environment. it is typically caused by industrial activity agricultural chemicals or improper disposal of waste. the most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons pyrene solvents pesticides lead and other heavy metals. contamination is correlated with the degree of industrialization and intensity of chemical substance. the concern over soil contamination stems primarily from health risks from direct contact with the contaminated soil vapour from the contaminants or from secondary contamination of water supplies within and underlying the soil. mapping of contaminated soil sites and the resulting cleanups are time consuming and expensive tasks requiring extensive amounts of geology hydrology chemistry computer modeling skills and gis in environmental contamination as well as an appreciation of the history of industrial chemistry. in north america and western europe the extent of contaminated land is best known with many of countries in these areas having a legal framework to identify and deal with this environmental problem. developing countries tend to be less tightly regulated despite some of them having undergone significant industrialization. soil pollution can be caused by the following the most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons solvents pesticides lead and other heavy metals. any activity that leads to other forms of soil degradation may indirectly worsen the contamination effects in that soil remediation becomes more tedious. historical deposition of coal ash used for residential commercial and industrial heating as well as for industrial processes such as ore smelting were a common source of contamination in areas that were industrialized before about. coal naturally concentrates lead and zinc during its formation as well as other heavy metals to a lesser degree. when the coal is burned most of these metals become concentrated in the ash. coal ash and slag may contain sufficient lead to qualify as a characteristic hazardous waste defined in the us as containing more than mg l of extractable lead using the tclp procedure. in addition to lead coal ash typically contains variable but significant concentrations of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons anthracene benzofluoranthene benzofluoranthene benzopyrene indenopyrene phenanthrene anthracene and others. these pahs are known human carcinogens and the acceptable concentrations of them in soil are typically around mg kg. coal ash and slag can be recognised by the presence of off white grains in soil gray heterogeneous soil or bubbly vesicular pebble sized grains. treated sewage sludge known in the industry as biosolids has become controversial as a fertilizer. as it is the byproduct of sewage treatment it generally contains more contaminants such as organisms pesticides and heavy metals than other soil. in the european union the urban waste water treatment directive allows sewage sludge to be sprayed onto land. the volume is expected to double to tons of dry solids in. this has good agricultural properties due to the high nitrogen and phosphate content. in wet weight was sprayed onto. of the land however this is expected to rise fold by. advocates say there is a need to control this so that pathogenic microorganisms do not get into water courses and to ensure that there is no accumulation of heavy metals in the top soil. a pesticide is a substance used to kill a pest. a pesticide may be a chemical substance biological agent antimicrobial disinfectant or device used against any pest. pests include insects plant pathogens weeds mollusks birds mammals fish nematodes and microbes that compete with humans for food destroy property spread or are a vector for disease or cause a nuisance. although there are benefits to the use of pesticides there are also drawbacks such as potential toxicity to humans and other organisms. herbicides are used to kill weeds especially on pavements and railways. they are similar to auxins and most are biodegradable by soil bacteria. however one group derived from trinitrotoluene have the impurity dioxin which is very toxic and causes fatality even in low concentrations. another herbicide is paraquat. it is highly toxic but it rapidly degrades in soil due to the action of bacteria and does not kill soil fauna. insecticides are used to rid farms of pests which damage crops. the insects damage not only standing crops but also stored ones and in the tropics it is reckoned that one third of the total production is lost during food storage. as with fungicides the first insecticides used in the nineteenth century were inorganic e. g. paris green and other compounds of arsenic. nicotine has also been used since the late eighteenth century. there are now two main groups of synthetic insecticides. organochlorines include ddt aldrin dieldrin and bhc. they are cheap to produce potent and persistent. ddt was used on a massive scale from the s with a peak of tonnes used. then usage fell as the harmful environmental effects were realized. it was found worldwide in fish and birds and was even discovered in the snow in the antarctic. it is only slightly soluble in water but is very soluble in the bloodstream. it affects the nervous and endocrine systems and causes the eggshells of birds to lack calcium causing them to be easily breakable. it is thought to be responsible for the decline of the numbers of birds of prey like ospreys and peregrine falcons in the s they are now recovering. as well as increased concentration via the food chain it is known to enter via permeable membranes so fish get it through their gills. as it has low water solubility it tends to stay at the water surface so organisms that live there are most affected. ddt found in fish that formed part of the human food chain caused concern but the levels found in the liver kidney and brain tissues was less than ppm and in fat was ppm which was below the level likely to cause harm. however ddt was banned in the uk and the united states to stop the further buildup of it in the food chain. u. s. manufacturers continued to sell ddt to developing countries who could not afford the expensive replacement chemicals and who did not have such stringent regulations governing the use of pesticides... organophosphates e. g. parathion methyl parathion and about other insecticides are available nationally. parathion is highly toxic methyl parathion is less so and malathion is generally considered safe as it has low toxicity and is rapidly broken down in the mammalian liver. this group works by preventing normal nerve transmission as cholinesterase is prevented from breaking down the transmitter substance acetylcholine resulting in uncontrolled muscle movements. the disposal of munitions and a lack of care in manufacture of munitions caused by the urgency of production can contaminate soil for extended periods. there is little published evidence on this type of contamination largely because of restrictions placed by governments of many countries on the publication of material related to war effort. however mustard gas stored during world war ii has contaminated some sites for up to years and the testing of anthrax as a potential biological weapon contaminated the whole island of gruinard. contaminated or polluted soil directly affects human health through direct contact with soil or via inhalation of soil contaminants which have vaporized potentially greater threats are posed by the infiltration of soil contamination into groundwater aquifers used for human consumption sometimes in areas apparently far removed from any apparent source of above ground contamination. this tends to result in the development of pollution related diseases. health consequences from exposure to soil contamination vary greatly depending on pollutant type pathway of attack and vulnerability of the exposed population. chronic exposure to chromium lead and other metals petroleum solvents and many pesticide and herbicide formulations can be carcinogenic can cause congenital disorders or can cause other chronic health conditions. industrial or man made concentrations of naturally occurring substances such as nitrate and ammonia associated with livestock manure from agricultural operations have also been identified as health hazards in soil and groundwater. chronic exposure to benzene at sufficient concentrations is known to be associated with higher incidence of leukemia. mercury and cyclodienes are known to induce higher incidences of kidney damage and some irreversible diseases. pcbs and cyclodienes are linked to liver toxicity. organophosphates and carbonates can induce a chain of responses leading to neuromuscular blockage. many chlorinated solvents induce liver changes kidney changes and depression of the central nervous system. there is an entire spectrum of further health effects such as headache nausea fatigue eye irritation and skin rash for the above cited and other chemicals. at sufficient dosages a large number of soil contaminants can cause death by exposure via direct contact inhalation or ingestion of contaminants in groundwater contaminated through soil. the scottish government has commissioned the institute of occupational medicine to undertake a review of methods to assess risk to human health from contaminated land. the overall aim of the project is to work up guidance that should be useful to scottish local authorities in assessing whether sites represent a significant possibility of significant harm to human health. it is envisaged that the output of the project will be a short document providing high level guidance on health risk assessment with reference to existing published guidance and methodologies that have been identified as being particularly relevant and helpful. the project will examine how policy guidelines have been developed for determining the acceptability of risks to human health and propose an approach for assessing what constitutes unacceptable risk in line with the criteria for sposh as defined in the legislation and the scottish statutory guidance. not unexpectedly soil contaminants can have significant deleterious consequences for ecosystems. there are radical soil chemistry changes which can arise from the presence of many hazardous chemicals even at low concentration of the contaminant species. these changes can manifest in the alteration of metabolism of endemic microorganisms and arthropods resident in a given soil environment. the result can be virtual eradication of some of the primary food chain which in turn could have major consequences for predator or consumer species. even if the chemical effect on lower life forms is small the lower pyramid levels of the food chain may ingest alien chemicals which normally become more concentrated for each consuming rung of the food chain. many of these effects are now well known such as the concentration of persistent ddt materials for avian consumers leading to weakening of egg shells increased chick mortality and potential extinction of species. effects occur to agricultural lands which have certain types of soil contamination. contaminants typically alter plant metabolism often causing a reduction in crop yields. this has a secondary effect upon soil conservation since the languishing crops can not shield the earths soil from erosion. some of these chemical contaminants have long half lives and in other cases derivative chemicals are formed from decay of primary soil contaminants. cleanup or environmental remediation is analyzed by environmental scientists who utilize field measurement of soil chemicals and also apply computer models for analyzing transport and fate of soil chemicals. various technologies have been developed for remediation of oil contaminated soil and sediments there are several principal strategies for remediation various national standards for concentrations of particular contaminants include the united states epa region preliminary remediation goals the u. s. epa region risk based concentrations and national environment protection council of australia guideline on investigation levels in soil and groundwater. the immense and sustained growth of the peoples republic of china since the s has exacted a price from the land in increased soil pollution. the ministry of ecology and environment believes it to be a threat to the environment to food safety and to sustainable agriculture. according to a scientific sampling million mu of chinas cultivated land have been polluted with contaminated water being used to irrigate a further. million mu and another million mu covered or destroyed by solid waste. in total the area accounts for one tenth of chinas cultivatable land and is mostly in economically developed areas. an estimated million tonnes of grain are contaminated by heavy metals every year causing direct losses of billion yuan. according to the received data from member states in the european union the number of estimated potential contaminated sites is more than. million and the identified contaminated sites around thousand. municipal and industrial wastes contribute most to soil contamination followed by the industrial commercial sector. mineral oil and heavy metals are the main contaminants contributing around to soil contamination. in terms of budget the management of contaminated sites is estimated to cost around billion euros annually. generic guidance commonly used in the united kingdom are the soil guideline values published by the department for environment food and rural affairs and the environment agency. these are screening values that demonstrate the minimal acceptable level of a substance. above this there can be no assurances in terms of significant risk of harm to human health. these have been derived using the contaminated land exposure assessment model. certain input parameters such as health criteria values age and land use are fed into clea uk to obtain a probabilistic output. guidance by the inter departmental committee for the redevelopment of contaminated land has been formally withdrawn by defra for use as a prescriptive document to determine the potential need for remediation or further assessment. the clea model published by defra and the environment agency in march sets a framework for the appropriate assessment of risks to human health from contaminated land as required by part iia of the environmental protection act. as part of this framework generic soil guideline values have currently been derived for ten contaminants to be used as intervention values. these values should not be considered as remedial targets but values above which further detailed assessment should be considered see dutch standards. three sets of clea sgvs have been produced for three different land uses namely it is intended that the sgvs replace the former icrcl values. the clea sgvs relate to assessing chronic risks to human health and do not apply to the protection of ground workers during construction or other potential receptors such as groundwater buildings plants or other ecosystems. the clea sgvs are not directly applicable to a site completely covered in hardstanding as there is no direct exposure route to contaminated soils. to date the first ten of fifty five contaminant sgvs have been published for the following arsenic cadmium chromium lead inorganic mercury nickel selenium ethyl benzene phenol and toluene. draft sgvs for benzene naphthalene and xylene have been produced but their publication is on hold. toxicological data has been published for each of these contaminants as well as for benzopyrene benzene dioxins furans and dioxin like pcbs naphthalene vinyl chloride tetrachloroethane and tetrachloroethane trichloroethane tetrachloroethene carbon tetrachloride dichloroethane trichloroethene and xylene. the sgvs for ethyl benzene phenol and toluene are dependent on the soil organic matter content content. as an initial screen the sgvs for som are considered to be appropriate. as of february there are a total of plus contaminated sites in canada. one infamous contaminated sited is located near a nickel copper smelting site in sudbury ontario. a study investigating the heavy metal pollution in the vicinity of the smelter reveals that elevated levels of nickel and copper were found in the soil values going as high as ppm ni and ppm cu within a. km range of the smelter location. other metals were also found in the soil such metals include iron cobalt and silver. furthermore upon examining the different vegetation surrounding the smelter it was evident that they too had been affected the results show that the plants contained nickel copper and aluminium as a result of soil contamination. in march the issue of uranium poisoning in punjab attracted press coverage. it was alleged to be caused by fly ash ponds of thermal power stations which reportedly lead to severe birth defects in children in the faridkot and bhatinda districts of punjab. the news reports claimed the uranium levels were more than times the maximum safe limit. in the government of india confirmed that the ground water in malwa belt of punjab has uranium metal that is above the trace limits set by the united nations world health organization. scientific studies based on over samples from various sampling points could not trace the source to fly ash and any sources from thermal power plants or industry as originally alleged. the study also revealed that the uranium concentration in ground water of malwa district is not times the who limits but only above the who limit in locations. this highest concentration found in samples was less than those found naturally in ground waters currently used for human purposes elsewhere such as finland. research is underway to identify natural or other sources for the uranium. plastic waste is choking our planet polluting the air water and soil both people and wildlife need to survive. and as this crisis spreads to every corner of the globe wwf is leading the charge to help reimagine how we source design dispose of and reuse the plastic materials communities most depend upon. because while plastic can help make our hospitals safer our food last longer and our packages more efficient to ship it has no place in nature. every day plastic is flowing into our natural environment at an unprecedented rate a dump truck every minute into our oceans alone. it s time to turn off the tap. together. wwf is uniting our global networks of industry leaders consumers and policymakers to transform our systems so the plastics we discard become plastics we use again. as everyday people continue doing their part to reduce reuse and recycle wwf is engaging policymakers to ensure the plastics leaving recycling bins stay in effective waste management systems and out of the hands of illegal plastic traffickers. through our resource plastic activation hub we re helping some of the world s leading companies translate ambitious plastic commitments into measurable change both across their business operations and well beyond their supply chains. we re working on the ground with local partners from indonesia to peru to keep plastic out of our planet s most extraordinary ecosystems. and in oceans the world over we re supporting communities and fishing crews big and small to improve gear use and recovery so issues like abandoned nets no longer pose one of the biggest threats to marine life. wwf is fighting for a world with no plastic in nature by. it s a world where our oceans teem with marine life not discarded nets bottles and bags. where no human breathes the toxic fumes of burning plastic. and where every indispensable plastic product is used to make another. it s a world where people and nature thrive together. join us. an exorbitant amount of plastic waste continues to plague our oceans threatening marine life and the people who depend on these waters for their livelihoods. despite the dire scope of this crisis the growing momentum to address it is promising. as we work towards a solution for the plastic waste crisis we must do it in a way that does not negatively impact other critical issues that are affecting the environment including the climate forests and food waste. for example when companies substitute paper products for plastics we must ensure that the paper comes from responsibly managed forests particularly those certified by the forest stewardship council. otherwise we re just shifting the environmental cost to another part of nature. wwf s living planet report found that global biodiversity declined by between and. over species are negatively impacted by plastic waste but we re only just starting to understand the effects of plastics on our ecosystems. plastic pollution has far reaching implications for local communities by posing a public health risk decreasing fish stock and contributing to climate change. communities in developing countries are particularly vulnerable to the effects of plastic pollution. in areas with poor infrastructure polluted coastlines where plastic accumulates can create a favorable breeding environment for disease carrying organisms such as insects and rodents. and plastic production represents up to of global petrol use on par with the aviation industry and incinerating plastic waste pollutes our air all while contributing to climate change. only of plastic waste in the us is recycled each year. when plastic ends up in nature this waste affects the fishery maritime and tourism industries causing an estimated billion in economic losses annually. our current waste management system and recycling infrastructure can not properly manage the volume of virgin plastic constantly entering the system. when we throw out plastic instead of recapturing and recycling it we miss an important opportunity to recapture the value of the resources already used for the production of our plastics. there is more than billion worth of plastic material sitting in the united states landfills at this very moment. wwf is advocating for a holistic solution that curbs plastic pollution and its many associated consequences. each one of us is part of the solutions needed for a plastic revolution. wwf works to raise awareness about ways we can address plastic waste in our daily lives through the choices we make about our consumption and habits. whether it s skipping some single use plastic packing or carrying a reusable water bottle we educate our wwf members and activists about the impact they can make to help end plastic pollution. wwf s campaign no plastic in nature aims to fix a broken system using a holistic approach. there is no single solution to plastic pollution we need a combination of strategies and engagement from all actors. by engaging all actors government businesses and the public we can examine every aspect of the life cycle of any given plastic material and identify key elements that are ripe for intervention. while our aim is to eliminate the leakage of plastic into nature by we have also set a goal for establishing a global legally binding agreement to end plastic pollution. such an agreement would introduce specific targets and pave the way for each nation to devise an action plan for addressing the plastic pollution epidemic. wwf is committed to engaging with the united states government and securing our elected officials support on this paris for plastics. companies are uniquely positioned to help drive large scale transformative change by improving their own plastic pollution footprint as well as influencing other key stakeholders like governments and consumers to do the same. through wwf s activation hub resource plastic we seek to redesign how businesses source use and dispose of plastics. to learn more about resource plastic please visit resource plastic. com. in coordination with several global consumer brand companies wwf has also established the bioplastic feedstock alliance a science driven organization which aims to evaluate diverse bioplastic feedstocks to better understand the potential sustainability opportunities of each. the bfa helps the bioplastic industry s emerging supply chain move in a positive direction. a major threat to marine biodiversity abandoned fishing gear or ghost gear is estimated to comprise up to of plastic waste in our oceans by volume. while this may seem like a small number ghost gear is the most harmful form of plastic pollution to marine species. ghost gear continues to capture wildlife well after it s abandoned pollute habitats and enters the food web as it degrades. ghost gear impacts of all marine mammals on the red list of threatened species. fishing feeds billions of people and is vital to the economies of countless coastal communities. but unsustainable practices litter the ocean with deadly traps that needlessly kill marine mammals turtles and seabirds. abandoned lost or discarded fishing gear commonly referred to as ghost gear contribute significantly to the problem of plastic pollution in our ocean. these gillnets traps and other types of fishing gear are particularly harmful because they can continue to catch target and non target species indiscriminately for years. this impacts important food resources as well as endangered species. because of this ghost gear has been coined as the most deadly form of marine plastic debris damaging vital ocean habitats aquatic life and livelihoods. eight million metric tons of plastic are leaking into our oceans every year. ask our government leaders to help stop plastics from leaking into our oceans. donate to support wwfs conservation efforts and say no to plastic by using wwf s reusable strawworld wildlife fund street n. w. washington dc world wildlife fund inc. is a nonprofit tax exempt charitable organization under section of the internal revenue code. donations are tax deductible as allowed by law. world wildlife fund. wwf and panda symbol are owned by wwf. all rights reserved. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. copyright national geographic societycopyright national geographic partners llc. all rights reserved air pollution is the release of pollutants such as gases particles biological molecules etc. into the air that is harmful to human health and the environment. air pollution refers to any physical chemical or biological change in the air. it is the contamination of air by harmful gases dust and smoke which affects plants animals and humans drastically. there is a certain percentage of gases present in the atmosphere. an increase or decrease in the composition of these gases is harmful to survival. this imbalance in the gaseous composition has resulted in an increase in earth s temperature which is known as global warming. there are two types of air pollutants the pollutants that directly cause air pollution are known as primary pollutants. sulphur dioxide emitted from factories is a primary pollutant. the pollutants formed by the intermingling and reaction of primary pollutants are known as secondary pollutants. smog formed by the intermingling of smoke and fog is a secondary pollutant. also read water pollutionfollowing are the important causes of air pollution the combustion of fossil fuels emits a large amount of sulphur dioxide. carbon monoxide released by incomplete combustion of fossil fuels also results in air pollution. the gases emitted from vehicles such as jeeps trucks cars buses etc. pollute the environment. these are the major sources of greenhouse gases and also result in diseases among individuals. ammonia is one of the most hazardous gases emitted during agricultural activities. the insecticides pesticides and fertilizers emit harmful chemicals in the atmosphere and contaminate it. factories and industries are the main source of carbon monoxide organic compounds hydrocarbons and chemicals. these are released into the air degrading its quality. in the mining process the minerals below the earth are extracted using large pieces of equipment. the dust and chemicals released during the process not only pollute the air but also deteriorate the health of the workers and people living in the nearby areas. the household cleaning products and paints contain toxic chemicals that are released in the air. the smell from the newly painted walls is the smell of the chemicals present in the paints. it not only pollutes the air but also affects breathing. also read ozone layer depletionthe hazardous effects of air pollution on the environment include air pollution has resulted in several respiratory disorders and heart diseases among humans. the cases of lung cancer have increased in the last few decades. children living near polluted areas are more prone to pneumonia and asthma. many people die every year due to the direct or indirect effects of air pollution. due to the emission of greenhouse gases there is an imbalance in the gaseous composition of the air. this has led to an increase in the temperature of the earth. this increase in earth s temperature is known as global warming. this has resulted in the melting of glaciers and an increase in sea levels. many areas are submerged underwater. the burning of fossil fuels releases harmful gases such as nitrogen oxides and sulphur oxides in the air. the water droplets combine with these pollutants become acidic and fall as acid rain which damages human animal and plant life. the release of chlorofluorocarbons halons and hydro chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere is the major cause of depletion of the ozone layer. the depleting ozone layer does not prevent the harmful ultraviolet rays coming from the sun and causes skin diseases and eye problems among individuals. the air pollutants suspend on the water bodies and affect the aquatic life. pollution also compels the animals to leave their habitat and shift to a new place. this renders them stray and has also led to the extinction of a large number of animal species. following are the measures one should adopt to control air pollution people should avoid using vehicles for shorter distances. rather they should prefer public modes of transport to travel from one place to another. this not only prevents pollution but also conserves energy. a large number of fossil fuels are burnt to generate electricity. therefore do not forget to switch off the electrical appliances when not in use. thus you can save the environment at the individual level. use of energy efficient devices such cfls also controls pollution to a greater level. the use of solar wind and geothermal energies reduce air pollution at a larger level. various countries including india have implemented the use of these resources as a step towards a cleaner environment. other air pollution control measures include also read environmental issuesto know more about what is air pollution its definition causes effects types of pollutants and air pollution control measures keep visiting byju s website or download the byju s app for further reference. put your understanding of this concept to test by answering a few mcqs. click start quiz to begin select the correct answer and click on the finish buttoncheck your score and answers at the end of the quizcongrats visit byju s for all biology related queries and study materialsyour result is as belowvery well explained. i could not find so amazing information on air pollution for school hw. epic stuff thank u for this this was very helpfull for me yes everyone has not aware about pollution and but we do effort for reduce pollution make our earth future brightright brothank you byjus for such an easy lesson relevant answers and easy to learn and understandbyjus helps me alotthanksat the time of lockdown the environment has improved but when the lockdown will end the pollution rate would increaseotherwise nicely explainedkeep it upthanx for all these info. a very informative pagethere is nothing more than living in a world full of polluted gas and we leave bad environment for our future generation. lets keep the word a beautiful place to live for everyone. very useful used it for my daughter s oralit is very usefuli understood everythingnice presentation and explanation and it s very useful for better understandingthank you so much this content was really very informative helpful and too useful for me. thanks to byjus thank you soo much for this info. it was really helpful for my projectthank you byjusthank you sooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo much this helped me in my projectthank you byju s. this helped in my preasentationit helped me a lot with my project thank you so much byjus it s very good for studentswell explained your mobile number and email id will not be published. required fields are marked request otp onvoice callwebsite post comment bookfree classbookfree classjump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. british poet w. h. auden once noted thousands have lived without love not one without water. yet while we all know water is crucial for life we trash it anyway. some percent of the world s wastewater is dumpedlargely untreatedback into the environment polluting rivers lakes and oceans. this widespread problem of water pollution is jeopardizing our health. unsafe water kills more people each year than war and all other forms of violence combined. meanwhile our drinkable water sources are finite less than percent of the earth s freshwater is actually accessible to us. without action the challenges will only increase by when global demand for freshwater is expected to be one third greater than it is now. sip a glass of cool clear water as you read this and you may think water pollution is a problem... somewhere else. but while most americans have access to safe drinking water potentially harmful contaminantsfrom arsenic to copper to leadhave been found in the tap water of every single state in the nation. still we re not hopeless against the threat to clean water. to better understand the problem and what we can do about it here s an overview of what water pollution is what causes it and how we can protect ourselves. water pollution occurs when harmful substancesoften chemicals or microorganismscontaminate a stream river lake ocean aquifer or other body of water degrading water quality and rendering it toxic to humans or the environment. water is uniquely vulnerable to pollution. known as a universal solvent water is able to dissolve more substances than any other liquid on earth. it s the reason we have kool aid and brilliant blue waterfalls. it s also why water is so easily polluted. toxic substances from farms towns and factories readily dissolve into and mix with it causing water pollution. when rain falls and seeps deep into the earth filling the cracks crevices and porous spaces of an aquifer it becomes groundwaterone of our least visible but most important natural resources. nearly percent of americans rely on groundwater pumped to the earth s surface for drinking water. for some folks in rural areas it s their only freshwater source. groundwater gets polluted when contaminantsfrom pesticides and fertilizers to waste leached from landfills and septic systemsmake their way into an aquifer rendering it unsafe for human use. ridding groundwater of contaminants can be difficult to impossible as well as costly. once polluted an aquifer may be unusable for decades or even thousands of years. groundwater can also spread contamination far from the original polluting source as it seeps into streams lakes and oceans. covering about percent of the earth surface water is what fills our oceans lakes rivers and all those other blue bits on the world map. surface water from freshwater sources accounts for more than percent of the water delivered to american homes. but a significant pool of that water is in peril. according to the most recent surveys on national water quality from the u. s. environmental protection agency nearly half of our rivers and streams and more than one third of our lakes are polluted and unfit for swimming fishing and drinking. nutrient pollution which includes nitrates and phosphates is the leading type of contamination in these freshwater sources. while plants and animals need these nutrients to grow they have become a major pollutant due to farm waste and fertilizer runoff. municipal and industrial waste discharges contribute their fair share of toxins as well. there s also all the random junk that industry and individuals dump directly into waterways. eighty percent of ocean pollution originates on landwhether along the coast or far inland. contaminants such as chemicals nutrients and heavy metals are carried from farms factories and cities by streams and rivers into our bays and estuaries from there they travel out to sea. meanwhile marine debrisparticularly plasticis blown in by the wind or washed in via storm drains and sewers. our seas are also sometimes spoiled by oil spills and leaksbig and smalland are consistently soaking up carbon pollution from the air. the ocean absorbs as much as a quarter of man made carbon emissions. when contamination originates from a single source it s called point source pollution. examples include wastewater discharged legally or illegally by a manufacturer oil refinery or wastewater treatment facility as well as contamination from leaking septic systems chemical and oil spills and illegal dumping. the epa regulates point source pollution by establishing limits on what can be discharged by a facility directly into a body of water. while point source pollution originates from a specific place it can affect miles of waterways and ocean. nonpoint source pollution is contamination derived from diffuse sources. these may include agricultural or stormwater runoff or debris blown into waterways from land. nonpoint source pollution is the leading cause of water pollution in u. s. waters but it s difficult to regulate since there s no single identifiable culprit. it goes without saying that water pollution can t be contained by a line on a map. transboundary pollution is the result of contaminated water from one country spilling into the waters of another. contamination can result from a disasterlike an oil spillor the slow downriver creep of industrial agricultural or municipal discharge. aurora photos alamynot only is the agricultural sector the biggest consumer of global freshwater resources with farming and livestock production using about percent of the earth s surface water supplies but it s also a serious water polluter. around the world agriculture is the leading cause of water degradation. in the united states agricultural pollution is the top source of contamination in rivers and streams the second biggest source in wetlands and the third main source in lakes. it s also a major contributor of contamination to estuaries and groundwater. every time it rains fertilizers pesticides and animal waste from farms and livestock operations wash nutrients and pathogenssuch bacteria and virusesinto our waterways. nutrient pollution caused by excess nitrogen and phosphorus in water or air is the number one threat to water quality worldwide and can cause algal blooms a toxic soup of blue green algae that can be harmful to people and wildlife. used water is wastewater. it comes from our sinks showers and toilets and from commercial industrial and agricultural activities. the term also includes stormwater runoff which occurs when rainfall carries road salts oil grease chemicals and debris from impermeable surfaces into our waterwaysmore than percent of the world s wastewater flows back into the environment without being treated or reused according to the united nations in some least developed countries the figure tops percent. in the united states wastewater treatment facilities process about billion gallons of wastewater per day. these facilities reduce the amount of pollutants such as pathogens phosphorus and nitrogen in sewage as well as heavy metals and toxic chemicals in industrial waste before discharging the treated waters back into waterways. that s when all goes well. but according to epa estimates our nation s aging and easily overwhelmed sewage treatment systems also release more than billion gallons of untreated wastewater each year. big spills may dominate headlines but consumers account for the vast majority of oil pollution in our seas including oil and gasoline that drips from millions of cars and trucks every day. moreover nearly half of the estimated million tons of oil that makes its way into marine environments each year comes not from tanker spills but from land based sources such as factories farms and cities. at sea tanker spills account for about percent of the oil in waters around the world while regular operations of the shipping industrythrough both legal and illegal dischargescontribute about one third. oil is also naturally released from under the ocean floor through fractures known as seeps. radioactive waste is any pollution that emits radiation beyond what is naturally released by the environment. it s generated by uranium mining nuclear power plants and the production and testing of military weapons as well as by universities and hospitals that use radioactive materials for research and medicine. radioactive waste can persist in the environment for thousands of years making disposal a major challenge. consider the decommissioned hanford nuclear weapons production site in washington where the cleanup of million gallons of radioactive waste is expected to cost more than billion and last through. accidentally released or improperly disposed of contaminants threaten groundwater surface water and marine resources. to put it bluntly water pollution kills. in fact it caused. million deaths in according to a study published in the lancet. contaminated water can also make you ill. every year unsafe water sickens about billion people. and low income communities are disproportionately at risk because their homes are often closest to the most polluting industries. waterborne pathogens in the form of disease causing bacteria and viruses from human and animal waste are a major cause of illness from contaminated drinking water. diseases spread by unsafe water include cholera giardia and typhoid. even in wealthy nations accidental or illegal releases from sewage treatment facilities as well as runoff from farms and urban areas contribute harmful pathogens to waterways. thousands of people across the united states are sickened every year by legionnaires disease with cases cropping up from california s disneyland to manhattan s upper east side. todd mcinturf the detroit news apmeanwhile the plight of residents in flint michiganwhere cost cutting measures and aging water infrastructure created the recent lead contamination crisisoffers a stark look at how dangerous chemical and other industrial pollutants in our water can be. the problem goes far beyond flint and involves much more than lead as a wide range of chemical pollutantsfrom heavy metals such as arsenic and mercury to pesticides and nitrate fertilizersare getting into our water supplies. once they re ingested these toxins can cause a host of health issues from cancer to hormone disruption to altered brain function. children and pregnant women are particularly at risk. even swimming can pose a risk. every year. million americans contract health issues such as skin rashes pinkeye respiratory infections and hepatitis from sewage laden coastal waters according to epa estimates. in order to thrive healthy ecosystems rely on a complex web of animals plants bacteria and fungiall of which interact directly or indirectly with each other. harm to any of these organisms can create a chain effect imperiling entire aquatic environments. when water pollution causes an algal bloom in a lake or marine environment the proliferation of newly introduced nutrients stimulates plant and algae growth which in turn reduces oxygen levels in the water. this dearth of oxygen known as eutrophication suffocates plants and animals and can create dead zones where waters are essentially devoid of life. in certain cases these harmful algal blooms can also produce neurotoxins that affect wildlife from whales to sea turtles. chemicals and heavy metals from industrial and municipal wastewater contaminate waterways as well. these contaminants are toxic to aquatic lifemost often reducing an organism s life span and ability to reproduceand make their way up the food chain as predator eats prey. that s how tuna and other big fish accumulate high quantities of toxins such as mercury. marine ecosystems are also threatened by marine debris which can strangle suffocate and starve animals. much of this solid debris such as plastic bags and soda cans gets swept into sewers and storm drains and eventually out to sea turning our oceans into trash soup and sometimes consolidating to form floating garbage patches. discarded fishing gear and other types of debris are responsible for harming more than different species of marine life. meanwhile ocean acidification is making it tougher for shellfish and coral to survive. though they absorb about a quarter of the carbon pollution created each year by burning fossil fuels oceans are becoming more acidic. this process makes it harder for shellfish and other species to build shells and may impact the nervous systems of sharks clownfish and other marine life. it s easy to tsk tsk the oil company with a leaking tanker but we re all accountable to some degree for today s water pollution problem. fortunately there are some simple ways you can prevent water contamination or at least limit your contribution to it one of the most effective ways to stand up for our waters is to speak out in support of the clean water rule which clarifies the clean water act s scope and protects the drinking water of one in three americans. tell the federal government the u. s. army corps of engineers and your local elected officials that you support the clean water rule. also learn how you and those around you can get involved in the policymaking process. our public waterways serve every american. we should all have a say in how they re protected. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. the mighty bivalves are both and this former schoolteacher and bartender seeks to inspire a new generation of aquaculturists while putting north carolina oysters on the map. the humble bivalves which concentrate everything from heavy metals to cancer drugs in their tissues provide an ideal way for scientists to monitor nearshore water health. the rollback jeopardizes the streams that flow into the state s rivers lakes and bays millions of acres of wetlands across the country and the drinking water supply. litter sewage plastic and other pollutants do more than just ruin the beauty of the beach. they are closing down coastal areas destroying marine life and making people seriously sick. federal rollbacks could leave new mexico s limited water dirtier by excluding up to percent of the state s waterways from protection. the pfas laden firefighting foam used in training exercises at military bases easily slips into groundwater supplies tainting everything around it. with their latest rollback the president and the epa chief show that they either don t understand how water pollution worksor simply don t care. as droughts parch the southeast interstate squabbles heat up over the tennessee river. seth siegel author of the new book troubled water what s wrong with what we drink says we must change people s mind sets and get to the root of the issue to ensure safe drinking water for everyone. ugly foul smelling and sometimes toxic algal blooms are becoming more common in freshwater ecosystems like rivers lakes ponds and reservoirs. here s a look at how excess algae can impact the environmentand human health. in a move that could open the door to industrial waste and interstate squabbles the ohio river valley water sanitation commission is making its water quality standards voluntary. president trump revokes the clean water rule and doubles down on his fake weather forecast while the bureau of land management hitches up its wagons to move west. the fate of southern arizona s embattled san pedro river could hinge on whether the government acts to protect the nearly extinct arizona eryngoand in doing so puts the brakes on groundwater pumping that s draining the landscape. from fertilizer runoff to methane emissions large scale industrial agriculture pollution takes a toll on the environment. the administration relocates science jobs refuses to fill others and tosses a lifeline to polluters. otherwise it was just an ordinary week of secret meetings and betrayals of the public interest. a growing number of communitiesboth coastal and inlandare finding themselves underwater. extreme weather sea level rise and other climate change impacts are increasingly to blame. here s a look at what links flooding and our warming world. more than craft breweries from across the country including brooklyn brewery and new belgium brewing company are joining nrdc to explain why clean water is essential for great tasting beer. by relying on plants soil and natural systems to manage rainfall runoff green infrastructure tackles urban water woes and boosts climate resilience. here s how. after an illegal dumping of close to tons of dangerous sludge and contaminated materials across the street from two schools a kentucky community struggles with what to do next. ten years after the disaster at a tennessee power plant the cleanup crew is seeking justice. at the same time the trump administration is weakening protections for this toxic pollution. as the trump administration ratchets up its rhetoric demanding billions for a wall american communities along the mexico border are in need of basic services like reliable sewage treatment. after officials repeatedly dismissed claims that flint s water was making people sick residents took action. here s how the lead contamination crisis unfoldedand what we can learn from it. the problem of how to dispose of nuclear waste has haunted the united states for six decades. it s now landed on new mexico s doorstep. lizzie carr is shining a light on what is floating through the world s waterways and breaking athletic records along the way. residents of cities like pittsburgh and newark continue to face high levels of this toxic metal in their drinking water supplies. here s what to do if this crisis affects you. here s why this environmental and public health win is so important. the trump administration wants to open our waterways back up to pollution. for years the state has ignored its foamy rivers and water supplies contaminated with chemicals called pfass. the big apple s combined sewer system is years oldand in desperate need of improvement. vague regulations let government officials hide drinking water contamination from the public. toxic algal blooms are suffocating waterways from the gulf of mexico to lake erie. for drinking water flood control climate defense habitat protection fishing swimming and of course craft beer. quick and easy things you can do to reduce water pollution and runoff. the cruel and un american folly of shutting down the epa s environmental justice program. lots of people think drinking bottled water is safer. is it thanks to the mississippi river s trash stream the gulf has some of the highest concentrations of plastic in the world. plus wheeler ignores factory farm pollution zinke ignores damage to wetlands and trump ignores public opposition to drilling the arctic refuge. when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosureswe use cookies to analyse how visitors use our website and to help us provide the best possible experience for users. view our cookie policy. tweet wwf ral garcavisit the wwf teachers sectionmore information on oceansriverslakeswetlandsfreshwateragricultureworking to sustain the natural world for the benefit of people and nature wwf world wide fund for nature panda symbol wwf world wide fund for nature wwf is a wwf registered trademark creative commons license. water pollution is defined as the presence in groundwater of toxic chemicals and biological agents that exceed what is naturally found in the water and may pose a threat to human health and or the environment. additionally water pollution may consist of chemicals introduced into the water bodies as a result of various human activities. any amount of those chemicals pollutes the water regardless of the harm they may pose to human health and the environment. many of the chlorinated solvents commonly used in industry are examples of such chemicals polluting our waters exclusively due to human activities. another example is mtbe a gasoline oxygenate that is currently banned in the u. s. regardless of their provenance the chemicals or biological agents causing water pollution are generically referred to as water pollutants. the chemical and biological agents represent the main causes of water pollution and are generically referred to as water pollutants. any kind of water can become polluted regardless of its size or location. this includes lakes from remote areas or huge water bodies and is due to the air transportation of pollutant particles and their transfer into precipitation water. the groundwater and surface water consist of swimming pools ponds lakes creeks rivers seas and oceans that may all become polluted at some point. due to the quick diffusion and dissipation of contamination and the faster natural degradation processes the bigger the water body is the shorter the time required for naturally cleansing the pollution and recovery. there are various types of water pollution based on the various causes of water pollution. various classifications can be made based on various water pollution causes. the type of the water pollutants based on this classification criteria water pollution can be i chemical when various chemicals are the water pollution causes. the following chemicals are the most common water pollutants ii radiological when radioactive materials are the water pollutant causes. iii biological when various microorganisms worms and or algae occurring in a large number are the water pollution causes. this type of pollution is caused by decaying organic material in water animal wastes as well as improper disposal of human wastes.. the type of the source of water pollutants these are localized sources like an industrial process a mining activity etc. these sources are usually regulated so that the effect may be predicted and the impact minimized. however accidental leaks and spills are an exception to that. these are unidentified sources from which pollutants are carried away by water discharges and runoffs. non point pollution may involve a broad range of pollutants but in lower amounts than the point sources. the main sources of pollution are all resulted from the disposal of chemical substances coming from medical industrial and household waste chaotic agricultural fertilizers disposal and accidental oil spills that pollute the water to a large extent. examples of major water pollutants that affect the health of humans are examples of major water pollutants that affect the ecosystem only are the following water pollution may cause a large variety of diseases and poses a serious problem for human health. this is mainly because we may get exposed to polluted water in various ways including but not necessarily limited to the effects of water pollution may appear immediately after exposure and be more or less violent in the case of drinking water with a high amount of pollutants. on the other hand the effects may appear some time after repetitive exposure to water contaminated with lower amounts of pollutants. the health effects of drinking contaminated water may range from simple intoxication and stomach aches to deadly diseases or sudden death. february read by usersaugust read by usersfebruary read by userscopyright www. environmentalpollutioncenters. org all rights reserved. disclaimer terms of use privacy policy sitemapcopyright national geographic societycopyright national geographic partners llc. all rights reservedthe requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. by chris woodford. last updated june. over two thirds of earths surface is covered by water less than a third is taken up by land. as earths population continues to grow people are putting ever increasing pressure on the planets waterresources. in a sense our oceans rivers and other inland waters arebeing squeezed by human activitiesnot so they take up less room butso their quality is reduced. poorer water quality means water pollution. we know that pollution is a human problem because it is arelatively recent development in the planets history before the century industrial revolution people lived more in harmony with theirimmediate environment. as industrialization has spread around theglobe so the problem of pollution has spread with it. when earthspopulation was much smaller no one believed pollution would everpresent a serious problem. it was once popularly believed thatthe oceans were far too big to pollute. today with around billionpeople on the planet it has become apparent that there are limits. pollution is one of the signs that humans have exceeded those limits. how serious is the problem according to the environmental campaign organizationwwf pollution from toxic chemicals threatens life on this planet. every ocean and every continent from the tropics to the once pristine polar regions is contaminated. photo detergent pollution entering a river. photo courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. water pollution can be defined in many ways. usually it means oneor more substances have built up in water to such an extent that theycause problems for animals or people. oceans lakes rivers and otherinland waters can naturally clean up a certain amount of pollution bydispersing it harmlessly. if you poured a cup of black ink into ariver the ink would quickly disappear into the rivers much larger volume of clean water. the inkwould still be there in the river but in such a low concentration thatyou would not be able to see it. at such low levels the chemicals in the ink probably would not present any real problem. however if you poured gallons of ink into a river every few seconds through a pipe the river would quickly turn black. the chemicals in the ink could very quickly have an effect on the quality of the water. this in turn could affect the health of all the plants animals and humans whoselives depend on the river. photo pollution means adding substances to the environment that dont belong therelike theair pollution from this smokestack. pollution is not always as obvious as this however. thus water pollution is all about quantities how much of apolluting substance is released and how big a volume of water it isreleased into. a small quantity of a toxic chemical may have littleimpact if it is spilled into the ocean from a ship. but the same amountof the same chemical can have a much bigger impact pumped into a lakeor river where there is less clean water to disperse it. water pollution almost always means that some damage has been done to an ocean river lake or other water source. a united nations report defined ocean pollution as fortunately earth is forgiving and damage from water pollution is often reversible. when we think of earths water resources we think of hugeoceans lakes and rivers. water resources like these are called surfacewaters. the most obvious type of water pollution affects surfacewaters. for example a spill from an oil tanker creates an oil slickthat can affect a vast area of the ocean. not all of earths water sits on its surface however. a great dealof water is held in underground rock structures known as aquifers which we can not see and seldom think about. water stored underground in aquifers is known as groundwater. aquifers feed our rivers and supply much of our drinking water. theytoo can become polluted for example when weed killers used inpeoples gardens drain into the ground. groundwater pollution is muchless obvious than surface water pollution but is no less of a problem. in a study in iowa in the united states found that over half thestates groundwater wells were contaminated with weed killers. you might think things would have improved since then but two decades on all thats really changed is the name of the chemicalswere using. today numerous scientific studies are still finding weed killers in groundwater in worrying quantities a study discovered glyphosate in percent of groundwater samples from catalonia spain scientific opinion differs on whether this is safe or not. surface waters and groundwater are the two types of water resourcesthat pollution affects. there are also two different ways in whichpollution can occur. if pollution comes from a single location such asa discharge pipe attached to a factory it is known as point sourcepollution. other examples of point source pollution include an oilspill from a tanker a discharge from a smoke stack or someone pouring oil from their car down a drain. a great deal ofwater pollution happens not from one single source but from manydifferent scattered sources. this is called nonpoint sourcepollution. photo above point source pollution comes from a single well defined place such as this pipe. below nonpoint source pollution comes from many sources. all the industrial plants alongside a river and theships that service them may be polluting the river collectively. both photos courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. when point source pollution enters the environment the place mostaffected is usually the area immediately around the source. forexample when a tanker accident occurs the oil slick is concentratedaround the tanker itself and in the right ocean conditions thepollution disperses the further away from the tanker you go. this isless likely to happen with nonpoint source pollution which bydefinition enters the environment from many different places at once. sometimes pollution that enters the environment in one place has aneffect hundreds or even thousands of miles away. this is known as transboundarypollution. one example is the way radioactive waste travels throughthe oceans from nuclear reprocessing plants in england and france tonearby countries such as ireland and norway. some forms of water pollution are very obvious everyone has seen tvnews footage of oil slicks filmed from helicopters flying overhead. water pollution is usually less obvious and much harder to detect thanthis. but how can we measure water pollution when we can not see it howdo we even know its there there are two main ways of measuring the quality of water. one is totake samples of the water and measure the concentrations of differentchemicals that it contains. if the chemicals are dangerous or theconcentrations are too great we can regard the water as polluted. measurements like this are known as chemical indicators ofwater quality. another way to measure water quality involves examiningthe fish insects and other invertebrates that the water will support. if many different types of creatures can live in a river the quality is likely tobe very good if the river supports no fish life at all the quality isobviously much poorer. measurements like this are called biologicalindicators of water quality. most water pollution doesnt begin in the water itself. take the oceans around percent of ocean pollution enters our seas from the land. virtually any human activity can have an effect on the quality of ourwater environment. when farmers fertilize the fields the chemicalsthey use are gradually washed by rain into the groundwater or surfacewaters nearby. sometimes the causes of water pollution are quitesurprising. chemicals released by smokestacks can enter theatmosphere and then fall back to earth as rain entering seas rivers and lakes and causing water pollution. thats called atmospheric deposition. water pollution has many different causes and this is one of the reasons why it is such adifficult problem to solve. with billions of people on the planet disposing of sewage wasteis a major problem. according to figures from the world health organization some billion people dont have access to safe drinking wateror the most basic sanitation. billion lack safely managed sanitation. although there have been great improvements in securing access to clean water relatively little genuine progress has been made on improving global sanitation in the last decade. sewage disposal affects peoples immediate environments and leads towater related illnesses such as diarrhea that kills children under five each year. in developed countries most people have flush toilets that takesewage waste quickly and hygienically away from their homes. yet the problem of sewage disposal does not end there. when youflush the toilet the waste has to go somewhere and even after itleaves the sewage treatment works there is still waste to dispose of. sometimes sewage waste is pumped untreated into the sea. until the early s around million tons of sewage was dumpedby barge from new york city each year. according to figures from the uk governments department forthe environment food and rural affairs the sewers of britain collect around billion liters of waste water every day there are still sewage overflow pipes through which in certain circumstances such as heavy storms raw sewage is pumped untreated into the sea. the new river that crosses the border from mexicointo california once carried with it million gallons of raw sewage each day a new waste water plant on the us mexico border completed in substantiallysolved that problem. unfortunately even in some of the richest nations thepractice of dumping sewage into the sea continues. in early it was reported that the tiny island of guernsey has decided to continue dumping tons of raw sewageinto the sea each day. in theory sewage is a completely natural substance that should bebroken down harmlessly in the environment percent of sewage is water. in practice sewage contains all kinds of other chemicals from the pharmaceutical drugs people take tothe paper plastic and other wastes they flush down their toilets. when people are sick with viruses the sewage they produce carriesthose viruses into the environment. it is possible to catch illnessessuch as hepatitis typhoid and cholera from river and sea water. photo during crop spraying some chemicals will drain into the soil. eventually they seep intorivers and other watercourses. photo courtesy of us department of agriculture agricultural research service. suitably treated and used in moderate quantities sewage can be afertilizer it returns important nutrients to the environment such asnitrogen and phosphorus which plants and animals need for growth. thetrouble is sewage is often released in much greater quantities thanthe natural environment can cope with. chemical fertilizers used byfarmers also add nutrients to the soil which drain into rivers andseas and add to the fertilizing effect of the sewage. together sewageand fertilizers can cause a massive increase in the growth of algae orplankton that overwhelms huge areas of oceans lakes or rivers. thisis known as a harmful algal bloom. it is harmful because itremoves oxygen from the water that kills other forms of life leadingto what is known as a dead zone. the gulf of mexico has one ofthe worlds most spectacular dead zones. each summer accordingto studies by the noaa it typically grows to an area of around square miles which isabout the same size as the state of connecticut. a few statistics illustrate the scale of the problem that wastewater cancause. around half of all ocean pollution is caused by sewage and wastewater. each year the world generates perhaps billion tons of industrialwaste much of which is pumped untreated into rivers oceans and otherwaterways. in the united states alone around factories takeclean water from rivers and many pump polluted waters back in theirplace. however there have been major improvements in waste watertreatment recently. since in the united states the environmental protection agency has invested about billion in improving water treatment plants that as of serve around percent of the us population. however another billion is still needed to update and upgrade the system. factories are point sources of water pollution but quite a lot ofwater is polluted by ordinary people from nonpoint sources this is howordinary water becomes waste water in the first place. virtually everyone pours chemicals of one sort or another down theirdrains or toilets. even detergents used inwashing machines anddishwashers eventually end up in our rivers and oceans. so do thepesticides we use on our gardens. a lot of toxic pollution also enterswaste water from highway runoff. highways are typically coveredwith a cocktail of toxic chemicalseverything from spilled fuel andbrake fluids to bits of worn tires and exhaust emissions. when it rains these chemicals washinto drains and rivers. it is not unusual for heavy summer rainstormsto wash toxic chemicals into rivers in such concentrations that theykill large numbers of fish overnight. it has been estimated that inone year the highway runoff from a single large city leaks as much oilinto our water environment as a typical tanker spill. some highway runoff runs away into drains others can pollute groundwater or accumulate in the land next to a road making it increasingly toxic as the years go by. detergents are relatively mild substances. at the opposite end of thespectrum are highly toxic chemicals such as polychlorinatedbiphenyls. they were once widely used to manufactureelectronic circuit boards but their harmful effects have now been recognized and their use is highly restricted in many countries. nevertheless an estimated half million tons of pcbs were dischargedinto the environment during the century. in a classicexample of transboundary pollution traces of pcbs have even been foundin birds and fish in the arctic. they were carried there through theoceans thousands of miles from where they originally entered theenvironment. although pcbs are widely banned their effects will befelt for many decades because they last a long time in the environmentwithout breaking down. another kind of toxic pollution comes from heavy metals such aslead cadmium and mercury. lead was once commonly used in gasoline though its use is now restricted in some countries. mercuryand cadmium are still used in batteries. until recently a highlytoxic chemical called tributyltin was used in paints toprotect boats from the ravaging effects of the oceans. ironically however tbt was gradually recognized as a pollutant boats paintedwith it were doing as much damage to the oceans as the oceans weredoing to the boats. the best known example of heavy metal pollution in the oceans tookplace in when a japanese factory discharged a significant amountof mercury metal into minamata bay contaminating the fish stocksthere. it took a decade for the problem to come to light. by that time many local people had eaten the fish and around were poisoned. hundreds of people were left dead or disabled. people view radioactive waste with great alarmand for good reason. at high enough concentrations it can kill in lower concentrations itcan cause cancers and other illnesses. the biggest sources ofradioactive pollution in europe are two factories that reprocess wastefuel from nuclear power plants sellafield on the north west coast of britain and cap la hague on thenorth coast of france. both discharge radioactive waste water into thesea which ocean currents then carry around the world. countries suchas norway which lie downstream from britain receive significantdoses of radioactive pollution from sellafield. the norwegian government has repeatedly complained that sellafield hasincreased radiation levels along its coast by times. both the irish and norwegian governments continue to press forthe plants closure. photo oil tanker spills are the most spectacular forms of pollution and the ones that catch public attention but only a fraction of all water pollution happens this way. photo courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. when we think of ocean pollution huge black oil slicks often springto mind yet these spectacular accidents represent only a tiny fractionof all the pollution entering our oceans. even considering oil byitself tanker spills are not as significant as they might seem only percent of the oil that enters the oceans comes from tanker accidents over percent of oil pollution at sea comes from routine shipping and from theoil people pour down drains on land. however what makes tanker spillsso destructive is the sheer quantity of oil they release at once inother words the concentration of oil they produce in one verylocalized part of the marine environment. the biggest oil spill inrecent years occurred when the tanker exxon valdez broke up inprince william sound in alaska in. around million gallons of oil were released into the pristine wildernessenough to fill your living room times over estimates of the marine animals killed in the spillvary from approximately sea otters and birds to as many as sea otters and sea birds. several billion salmon and herring eggs are also believed to have been destroyed. if youve ever taken part in a community beach clean youll knowthat plastic is far and away the most common substance that washes upwith the waves. there are three reasons for this plastic is one ofthe most common materials used for making virtually every kind ofmanufactured object from clothing to automobile parts plasticis light and floats easily so it can travel enormous distances acrossthe oceans most plastics are not biodegradable which means that things likeplastic bottle tops can survive in the marine environment for a long time. while plastics are not toxic in quite the same way as poisonouschemicals they nevertheless present a major hazard to seabirds fish and other marine creatures. for example plastic fishing lines andother debris can strangle or choke fish. about half of allthe worlds seabird species are known to have eaten plastic residues. in one study of shearwaters in the north pacific over percent of the birds were found to contain plastic residues in their stomachs. in the early s marine scientist tim benton collecteddebris from a km length of beach in the remote pitcairn islandsin the south pacific. his study recorded approximately a thousandpieces of garbage including pieces of plastic plastic bottles and two dolls heads. today much media attention focuses on the great pacific garbage patch a floating oceanic graveyard of plastic junk roughly three times the size of france discovered by sailor charles j. moore in. but as youll know well enough if youve ever taken part in a community beachclean persistent plastic litters every ocean on the planet some million tons of new plastic are dumped in the sea every single year. most peoples idea of water pollution involves things like sewage toxic metals or oil slicks but pollution can be biological as well aschemical. in some parts of the world alien species are a majorproblem. alien species are animals or plants from one region that have been introduced into adifferent ecosystem where they do not belong. outside their normalenvironment they have no natural predators so they rapidly run wild crowding out the usual animals or plants that thrive there. commonexamples of alien species include zebra mussels in the great lakes ofthe usa which were carried there from europe by ballast water. the mediterranean sea has been invaded by akind of alien algaecalled caulerpa taxifolia. in the black sea an alien jellyfishcalled mnemiopsis leidyi reduced fish stocks by percent afterarriving in ballast water. in san francisco bay asian clams called potamocorbulaamurensis also introduced by ballast water have dramaticallyaltered the ecosystem. in cornell universitys david pimentel estimated that alien invaders like this cost the us economy billion a year in the european commission put the cost to europe at billion a year and growingall the time. photo invasive species above water hyacinth crowding out a waterway around an old fence post. photo by steve hillebrand. below non native zebra mussels clumped on a native mussel. both photos courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. these are the most common forms of pollutionbut by no means theonly ones. heat or thermal pollution from factories and powerplants also causes problems in rivers. by raising the temperature itreduces the amount of oxygen dissolved in the water thus also reducingthe level of aquatic life that the river can support. another type of pollution involves the disruption of sedimentsthat flow from rivers into the sea. dams built for hydroelectric poweror water reservoirs can reduce the sediment flow. this reduces the formation of beaches increases coastal erosion and reduces the flow ofnutrients from rivers into seas. increased sediments can also present a problem. during construction work soil rock and other fine powders sometimes enters nearby rivers in large quantities causing it to become turbid. the extra sediment can block the gills of fish effectively suffocating them. construction firms often now take precautions to prevent this kind of pollution from happening. some people believe pollution is an inescapable result of humanactivity they argue that if we want to have factories cities ships cars oil and coastal resorts some degree of pollution is almostcertain to result. in other words pollution is a necessary evil that peoplemust put up with if they want to make progress. fortunately noteveryone agrees with this view. one reason people have woken up to theproblem of pollution is that it brings costs of its own thatundermine any economic benefits that come about by polluting. take oil spills for example. they can happen if tankers are toopoorly built to survive accidents at sea. but the economic benefit ofcompromising on tanker quality brings an economic cost when an oilspill occurs. the oil can wash up on nearby beaches devastate the ecosystem and severely affect tourism. the main problem is that the people whobear the cost of the spill arenot the people who caused the problem in the first place. yet arguably everyone who puts gasoline into their caror uses almost any kind of petroleum fueledtransportcontributes to the problem in some way. so oil spills are aproblem for everyone not just people who live by the coast and tankeroperates. sewage is another good example of how pollution can affect us all. sewage discharged into coastal waters can wash up on beaches and causea health hazard. people who bathe or surf in the water can fall ill ifthey swallow polluted wateryet sewage can have other harmful effectstoo it can poison shellfish that grownear the shore. people who eat poisoned shellfish risk suffering froman acuteand sometimes fatalillness called paralytic shellfishpoisoning. shellfish is no longer caught along many shores becauseit is simply too polluted with sewage or toxic chemical wastes thathave discharged from the land nearby. pollution matters because it harms the environment on which peopledepend. the environment is not something distant and separate from ourlives. its not a pretty shoreline hundreds of miles from our homes ora wilderness landscape that we see only on tv. the environment iseverything that surrounds us that gives us life and health. destroyingthe environment ultimately reduces the quality of our own livesandthat most selfishly is why pollution should matter to all of us. there is no easy way to solve water pollution if there were itwouldnt be so much of a problem. broadly speaking there are threedifferent things that can help to tackle the problemeducation laws and economicsand they work together as a team. making people aware of the problem is the first step to solving it. in the early s when surfers in britain grew tired of catching illnessesfrom water polluted with sewage they formed a group called surfersagainst sewage to force governments and water companies to clean uptheir act. people whove grown tired of walking the worlds pollutedbeaches often band together to organize community beach cleaningsessions. anglers who no longer catch so many fish have campaigned fortougher penalties against factories that pour pollution into ourrivers. greater public awareness can make a positive difference. one of the biggest problems with water pollution is itstransboundary nature. many rivers cross countries while seas spanwhole continents. pollution discharged by factories in one country withpoor environmental standards can cause problems in neighboringnations even when they have tougher laws and higher standards. environmental laws can make it tougher for people to pollute but to bereally effective they have to operate across national and internationalborders. this is why we have international laws governing the oceans such as the un convention on the law of the sea the london convention the marpol international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships and the ospar convention for the protection of the marineenvironment of the north east atlantic. the european union haswater protection laws that apply to all of itsmember states. they include the bathing water directive which seeks to ensure the quality of the waters that people use forrecreation. most countries also have their own water pollution laws. inthe united states for example there is thelean water actand the safe drinking water act. most environmental experts agree that the best way to tacklepollution is through something called the polluter pays principle. this means that whoever causes pollution should have to pay to clean itup one way or another. polluter pays can operate in all kinds of ways. it could mean that tanker owners should have to take out insurance thatcovers the cost of oil spill cleanups for example. it could also meanthat shoppers should have to pay for their plastic grocery bags as isnow common in ireland to encourage recycling and minimize waste. or itcould mean that factories that use rivers must have their water inletpipes downstream of their effluent outflow pipes so if they causepollution they themselves are the first people to suffer. ultimately the polluter pays principle is designed to deter people from pollutingby making it less expensive for them to behave in an environmentallyresponsible way. life is ultimately about choicesand so is pollution. we can livewith sewage strewn beaches dead rivers and fish that are toopoisonous to eat. or we can work together to keep the environment cleanso the plants animals and people who depend on it remain healthy. wecan take individual action to help reduce water pollution for example by using environmentally friendly detergents not pouring oil downdrains reducing pesticides and so on. we can take community actiontoo by helping out on beach cleans or litter picks to keep our riversand seas that little bit cleaner. and we can take action as countriesand continents to pass laws that will make pollution harder and theworld less polluted. working together we can make pollution less of aproblemand the world a better place. wherever possible ive referenced my sources with links the following notes are mostly references to books journals and other offline reports that cant be linked the same way. please do not copy our articles onto blogs and other websitesarticles from this website are registered at the us copyright office. copying or otherwise using registered works without permission removing this or other copyright notices and or infringing related rights could make you liable to severe civil or criminal penalties. text copyright chris woodford. all rights reserved. full copyright notice and terms of use. this article was originally written for the uk rivers network and first published on their website in april. it is revised and updated every year. please rate or give feedback on this page and i will make a donation to wateraid. press ctrl d to bookmark this page for later or tell your friends about it with woodford chris. water pollution. retrieved from https www. explainthatstuff. com waterpollution. html. water pollution has been documented as a contributor to a wide range of health problems and disorders in humans. it has also been shown to have drastically negative impacts on wild animals and the environment as a whole. there are quite a few different effects of the types of water pollution that are of significant importance to humans. water pollution can pose health dangers to humans who come into contact with it either directly or indirectly. the risks of your health being negatively impacted by polluted drinking water in a developed country is small in comparison with developing countries. however it is possible to become ill from contaminated water. when you are out hiking you can acquire giardiasis that can lead to the presentation of acute symptoms like vomiting and intense nausea. this infection is caused by drinking water that has been fouled by animal wastes in untreated waterways. in anthropogenic environments like cities and towns the potential toxins are far more numerous. the effects of agricultural runoff and land pollution have on waterways rivers streams and ultimately the ocean introduces toxic chemcials and livestock waste into water supplies and the ocean. hurricane damage and flooding of farms and farmlands have resulted in an ever increasing amount of toxic pollutants in water to the detriment of human marine and aquatic life. health risks from pollution vary from area to area. one of the most pervasive non localized water pollution issues facing the world today is the level of mercury in the oceans. inorganic mercury is a common byproduct of a number of industrial processes. the level of mercury in fish is mostly dangerous for small children and women who might become pregnant are pregnant or are nursing. mercury has been found to interfere with the development of the central nervous system in fetuses and young children which could potentially lead to a large amount of long term side effects. in louisiana water quality can be so bad in many waterways that fish advisories are often posted. people are warned against eating fish from these contaminated waterways. this is largely due to industrial runoff from localized sources and the accumulative effects of runoff and dumping from states that lie along the mississippi river. when the river empties into louisiana it brings those accumulated toxins with it. this is believed to lead to higher rates of cancer in areas surrounding the mississippi delta in an area that is colloquially referred to as cancer alley. phosphorous runoff from industry can get into waterways and create toxic algal blooms. these blooms have been linked to higher occurrences of paralytic shellfish poisoning in humans which can lead to death. according to the national park service the minnesota pollution control agency has taken on the project to clean up the mississippi river. the ambitious goal is to restore the river so it is once more fishable and swimmable. the mpca has teamed up with numerous partners to work on cleaning up the mississippi river and warns it will take several years to undo decades of damage. water pollution also causes negative effects within the environment to animals and their habitats. the entrance of pollutants into waterways can have a wide range of impacts. it is possible for the pollutants to raise the temperature of the water enough to force fish out in search of cooler waters. this can itself create an ecological deadzone. water pollution can also significantly increase the rate of algal blooms. these blooms create massive fish die offs as the oxygen in the water gets depleted and the fish suffocate. fish can also be killed when excessive algae get caught in their gills. oil spills are a common occurrence throughout the world however major spills like the exxon valdez and the bp deepwater horizon disaster have shown what water pollution can do on a very large scale. it was found that dolphins have been dying in record numbers near the site of the bp deepwater horizon disaster. it has also been found that the oil from the bp disaster has gotten into wetlands which are considered the nursery for nearly every creature that lives in the area. the effects of water pollution are not always immediate. they arent always seen at the point of contamination. they are sometimes never known by the person responsible for the pollution. however water pollution has a huge impact on the lives of all people. with knowledge consideration and preparation water pollution can be decreased. it doesnt take much effort just a little thought. our editors will review what you ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. water pollution is the release of substances into bodies of water that makes water unsafe for human use and disrupts aquatic ecosystems. water pollution can be caused by a plethora of different contaminants including toxic waste petroleum and disease causing microorganisms. human activities that generate domestic sewage and toxic waste cause water pollution by contaminating water with disease causing microorganisms and poisonous substances. oil spills are another source of water pollution that have devastating impacts on surrounding ecosystems. sewage can promote algae growth which can eventually result in eutrophic dead zones where aquatic life can not survive because of a lack of oxygen. microplastics are often found in marine wildlife and can become concentrated in humans who consume seafood because of biomagnification. oil spills such as the deepwater horizon oil spill in strand and kill many different marine species. while some studies point to human activity as a catalyst for red tide scientists are unsure about its cause. red tide is a common term for harmful algal blooms that often poison or kill wildlife and humans who consume contaminated seafood. red tides can severely impact ecosystems and local economies. water pollution the release of substances into subsurface groundwater or into lakes streams rivers estuaries and oceans to the point where the substances interfere with beneficial use of the water or with the natural functioning of ecosystems. in addition to the release of substances such as chemicals or microorganisms water pollution may also include the release of energy in the form of radioactivity or heat into bodies of water. water bodies can be polluted by a wide variety of substances including pathogenic microorganisms putrescible organic waste plant nutrients toxic chemicals sediments heat petroleum and radioactive substances. several types of water pollutants are considered below. domestic sewage is the primary source of pathogens and putrescible organic substances. because pathogens are excreted in feces all sewage from cities and towns is likely to contain pathogens of some type potentially presenting a direct threat to public health. putrescible organic matter presents a different sort of threat to water quality. as organics are decomposed naturally in the sewage by bacteria and other microorganisms the dissolved oxygen content of the water is depleted. this endangers the quality of lakes and streams where high levels of oxygen are required for fish and other aquatic organisms to survive. sewage treatment processes reduce the levels of pathogens and organics in wastewater but they do not eliminate them completely. domestic sewage is also a major source of plant nutrients mainly nitrates and phosphates. excess nitrates and phosphates in water promote the growth of algae sometimes causing unusually dense and rapid growths known as algal blooms. when the algae die oxygen dissolved in the water declines because microorganisms use oxygen to digest algae during the process of decomposition. anaerobic organisms then metabolize the organic wastes releasing gases such as methane and hydrogen sulfide which are harmful to the aerobic forms of life. the process by which a lake changes from a clean clear conditionwith a relatively low concentration of dissolved nutrients and a balanced aquatic communityto a nutrient rich algae filled state and thence to an oxygen deficient waste filled condition is called eutrophication. eutrophication is a naturally occurring slow and inevitable process. however when it is accelerated by human activity and water pollution it can lead to the premature aging and death of a body of water. waste is considered toxic if it is poisonous radioactive explosive carcinogenic mutagenic teratogenic or bioaccumulative. sources of toxic chemicals include improperly disposed wastewater from industrial plants and chemical process facilities as well as surface runoff containing pesticides used on agricultural areas and suburban lawns. sediment resulting from soil erosion can be carried into water bodies by surface runoff. suspended sediment interferes with the penetration of sunlight and upsets the ecological balance of a body of water. also it can disrupt the reproductive cycles of fish and other forms of life and when it settles out of suspension it can smother bottom dwelling organisms. heat is considered to be a water pollutant because it decreases the capacity of water to hold dissolved oxygen in solution and it increases the rate of metabolism of fish. valuable species of game fish can not survive in water with very low levels of dissolved oxygen. a major source of heat is the practice of discharging cooling water from power plants into rivers the discharged water may be as much as c warmer than the naturally occurring water. petroleum pollution occurs when oil from roads and parking lots is carried in surface runoff into water bodies. accidental oil spills are also a source of oil pollutionas in the devastating spills from the tanker exxon valdez and from the deepwater horizon oil rig. oil slicks eventually move toward shore harming aquatic life and damaging recreation areas. groundwaterwater contained in underground geologic formations called aquifersis a source of drinking water for many people. for example about half the people in the united states depend on groundwater for their domestic water supply. although groundwater may appear crystal clear it may still be polluted by dissolved chemicals and by bacteria and viruses. sources of chemical contaminants include poorly designed or poorly maintained subsurface sewage disposal systems industrial wastes disposed of in improperly lined or unlined landfills or lagoons leachates from unlined municipal refuse landfills mining and petroleum production and leaking underground storage tanks below gasoline service stations. in coastal areas increasing withdrawal of groundwater can cause saltwater intrusion as the water table drops seawater is drawn into wells. although estuaries and oceans contain vast volumes of water their natural capacity to absorb pollutants is limited. contamination from sewage outfall pipes from dumping of sludge or other wastes and from oil spills can harm marine life especially microscopic phytoplankton that serve as food for larger aquatic organisms. sometimes unsightly and dangerous waste materials can be washed back to shore littering beaches with hazardous debris. by an estimated. million and. million tonnes of plastic debris had been dumped into the oceans annually and floating plastic waste had accumulated in earth s five subtropical gyres that cover percent of the world s oceans. another ocean pollution problem is the seasonal formation of dead zones in certain coastal areas. the cause is nutrient enrichment from dispersed agricultural runoff and concomitant algal blooms. dead zones occur worldwide one of the largest of these forms annually in the gulf of mexico beginning at the mississippi river delta. water pollutants come from either point sources or dispersed sources. a point source is a pipe or channel such as those used for discharge from an industrial facility or a city sewerage system. a dispersed source is a very broad unconfined area from which a variety of pollutants enter the water body such as the runoff from an agricultural area. point sources of water pollution are easier to control than dispersed sources because the contaminated water has been collected and conveyed to one single point where it can be treated. pollution from dispersed sources is difficult to control and despite much progress in the building of modern sewage treatment plants dispersed sources continue to cause a large fraction of water pollution problems. although pure water is rarely found in nature the characterization of water quality is a function of the intended use of the water. for example water that is clean enough for swimming and fishing may not be clean enough for drinking and cooking. water quality standards provide a legal framework for the prevention of water pollution of all types. there are several types of water quality standards. stream standards are those that classify streams rivers and lakes on the basis of their maximum beneficial use they set allowable levels of specific substances or qualities allowed in those bodies of water based on their given classification. effluent standards set specific limits on the levels of contaminants allowed in the final discharges from wastewater treatment plants. drinking water standards include limits on the levels of specific contaminants allowed in potable water delivered to homes for domestic use. in the united states the clean water act and its amendments regulate water quality and set minimum standards for waste discharges for each industry as well as regulations for specific problems such as toxic chemicals and oil spills. in the european union water quality is governed by the water framework directive the drinking water directive and other laws. humans are increasingly influencing the climate and the earths temperature by burning fossil fuels cutting down forests and farming livestock. this adds enormous amounts of greenhouse gases to those naturally occurring in the atmosphere increasing the greenhouse effect and global warming. the main driver of climate change is the greenhouse effect. some gases in the earths atmosphere act a bit like the glass in a greenhouse trapping the suns heat and stopping it from leaking back into space and causing global warming. many of these greenhouse gases occur naturally but human activity is increasing the concentrations of some of them in the atmosphere in particular co produced by human activities is the largest contributor to global warming. by its concentration in the atmosphere had risen to above its pre industrial level. other greenhouse gases are emitted by human activity in smaller quantities. methane is a more powerful greenhouse gas than co but has a shorter atmospheric lifetime. nitrous oxide like co is a long lived greenhouse gas that accumulates in the atmosphere over decades to centuries. natural causes such as changes in solar radiation or volcanic activity are estimated to have contributed less than plus or minus. c to total warming between and. was the warmest decade recorded with global average temperature reaching. c above pre industrial levels in. human induced global warming is presently increasing at a rate of. c per decade. an increase of compared to the temperature in pre industrial times is associated with serious negative impacts on to the natural environment and human health and wellbeing including a much higher risk that dangerous and possibly catastrophic changes in the global environment will occur. for this reason the international community has recognised the need to keep warming well below and pursue efforts to limit it to. c. share this page models that account only for the effects of natural processes are not able to explain the warming observed over the past century. models that also account for the greenhouse gases emitted by humans are able to explain this warming. click the image to view a larger version. earths temperature depends on the balance between energy entering and leaving the planets system. when incoming energy from the sun is absorbed by the earth system earth warms. when the suns energy is reflected back into space earth avoids warming. when absorbed energy is released back into space earth cools. many factors both natural and human can cause changes in earths energy balance including these factors have caused earths climate to change many times. scientists have pieced together a record of earths climate dating back hundreds of thousands of years by analyzing a number of indirect measures of climate such as ice cores tree rings glacier lengths pollen remains and ocean sediments and by studying changes in earths orbit around the sun. this record shows that the climate system varies naturally over a wide range of time scales. in general climate changes prior to the industrial revolution in the s can be explained by natural causes such as changes in solar energy volcanic eruptions and natural changes in greenhouse gas concentrations. recent climate changes however can not be explained by natural causes alone. research indicates that natural causes do not explain most observed warming especially warming since the mid century. rather it is extremely likely that human activities have been the dominant cause of that warming. top of pageradiative forcing is a measure of the influence of a particular factor on the net change in earths energy balance. on average a positive radiative forcing tends to warm the surface of the planet while a negative forcing tends to cool the surface. ghgs have a positive forcing because they absorb energy radiating from earths surface rather than allowing it to be directly transmitted into space. this warms the atmosphere like a blanket. aerosols or small particles can have a positive or negative radiative forcing depending on how they absorb and emit heat or reflect light. for example black carbon aerosols have a positive forcing since they absorb sunlight. sulfate aerosols have a negative forcing since they reflect sunlight back into space. noaas annual ghg index which tracks changes in radiative forcing from ghgs over time shows that such forcing from human added ghgs has increased. percent between and. increases in co in the atmosphere are responsible for of the increase. the contribution to radiative forcing by ch and cfcs has been nearly constant or declining respectively in recent years. when sunlight reaches earths surface it can either be reflected back into space or absorbed by earth. once absorbed the planet releases some of the energy back into the atmosphere as heat. greenhouse gases like water vapor carbon dioxide and methane absorb energy slowing or preventing the loss of heat to space. in this way ghgs act like a blanket making earth warmer than it would otherwise be. this process is commonly known as the greenhouse effect. over the last several hundred thousand years co levels varied in tandem with the glacial cycles. during warm interglacial periods co levels were higher. during cool glacial periods co levels were lower. the heating or cooling of earths surface and oceans can cause changes in the natural sources and sinks of these gases and thus change greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. these changing concentrations are thought to have acted as a positive feedback amplifying the temperature changes caused by long term shifts in earths orbit. estimates of the earth s changing co concentration and antarctic temperature based on analysis of ice core data extending back years. until the past century natural factors caused atmospheric co concentrations to vary within a range of about to parts per million by volume. warmer periods coincide with periods of relatively high co concentrations. note the past century s temperature changes and rapid co rise are not shown here. increases over the past half century are shown in the recent role section. click the image to view a larger version. source based on data appearing in nrc. climate feedbacks amplify or reduce direct warming and cooling effects. they do not change the planets temperature directly. feedbacks that amplify changes are called positive feedbacks. feedbacks that counteract changes are called negative feedbacks. feedbacks are associated with changes in surface reflectivity clouds water vapor and the carbon cycle. water vapor appears to cause the most important positive feedback. as earth warms the rate of evaporation and the ability of air to hold water vapor both rise increasing the amount of water vapor in the air. because water vapor is a greenhouse gas this leads to further warming. the melting of arctic sea ice is another example of a positive climate feedback. as temperatures rise sea ice retreats. the loss of ice exposes the underlying sea surface which is darker and absorbs more sunlight than ice increasing the total amount of warming. some types of clouds cause a negative feedback. warming temperatures can increase the amount or reflectivity of these clouds reflecting more sunlight back into space cooling the surface of the planet. other types of clouds however contribute a positive feedback. there are also several positive feedbacks that increase ghg concentrations. for example as temperatures warm these changes lead to higher concentrations of atmospheric ghgs and contribute to increased warming. since the industrial revolution began around human activities have contributed substantially to climate change by adding co and other heat trapping gases to the atmosphere. these greenhouse gas emissions have increased the greenhouse effect and caused earths surface temperature to rise. the primary human activity affecting the amount and rate of climate change is greenhouse gas emissions from the burning of fossil fuels. the most important ghgs directly emitted by humans include carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide and several others. the sources and recent trends of these gases are detailed below. carbon dioxide is the primary greenhouse gas that is contributing to recent climate change. co is absorbed and emitted naturally as part of the carbon cycle through plant and animal respiration volcanic eruptions and ocean atmosphere exchange. human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels and changes in land use release large amounts of co causing concentrations in the atmosphere to rise. atmospheric co concentrations have increased by more than since pre industrial times from approximately parts per million by volume in the century to over ppmv in. the monthly average concentration at mauna loa now exceeds ppmv for the first time in human history. the current co level is higher than it has been in at least years. some volcanic eruptions released large quantities of co in the distant past. however the u. s. geological survey reports that human activities now emit more than times as much co as volcanoes each year. human activities currently release over billion tons of co into the atmosphere every year. the resultant build up of co in the atmosphere is like a tub filling with water where more water flows from the faucet than the drain can take away. for more information on the human and natural sources and sinks of co emissions and actions that can reduce emissions see the carbon dioxide page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. methane is produced through both natural and human activities. for example natural wetlands agricultural activities and fossil fuel extraction and transport all emit ch. methane is more abundant in earths atmosphere now than at any time in at least the past years. due to human activities ch concentrations increased sharply during most of the century and are now more than two and a half times pre industrial levels. in recent decades the rate of increase has slowed considerably. for more information on ch emissions and sources and actions that can reduce emissions see epas methane page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. for information on how methane is impacting the arctic see the epa report methane and black carbon impacts on the arctic. nitrous oxide is produced through natural and human activities mainly through agricultural activities and natural biological processes. fuel burning and some other processes also create no. concentrations of no have risen approximately since the start of the industrial revolution with a relatively rapid increase toward the end of the century. overall no concentrations have increased more rapidly during the past century than at any time in the past years. for more information on no emissions and sources and actions that can reduce emissions see epas nitrous oxide page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. for more information on greenhouse gas emissions see the greenhouse gas emissions website including an expanded discussion of global warming potentials and how they are used to measure the relative strengths of greenhouse gases. to learn more about actions that can reduce these emissions see what you can do. particles and aerosols in the atmosphere can also affect climate. human activities such as burning fossil fuels and biomass contribute to emissions of these substances although some aerosols also come from natural sources such as volcanoes and marine plankton. for more information on greenhouse gas emissions see the greenhouse gas emissions website. to learn more about actions that can reduce these emissions see what epa is doing and what you can do. top of pagethe sun s energy received at the top of earth s atmosphere has been measured by satellites since. it has followed its natural year cycle of small ups and downs but with no net increase. over the same period global temperature has risen markedly. click the image to view a larger version. source usgcrp. climate is influenced by natural changes that affect how much solar energy reaches earth. these changes include changes within the sun and changes in earths orbit. changes occurring in the sun itself can affect the intensity of the sunlight that reaches earths surface. the intensity of the sunlight can cause either warming or cooling. the sun follows a natural year cycle of small ups and downs in intensity but the effect on earths climate is small. changes in the shape of earths orbit as well as the tilt and position of earths axis can also affect the amount of sunlight reaching earths surface. changes in the suns intensity have influenced earths climate in the past. for example the so called little ice age between the and centuries may have been partially caused by a low solar activity phase from to which coincided with cooler temperatures. the little ice age refers to a slight cooling of north america europe and probably other areas around the globe. changes in earths orbit have had a big impact on climate over tens to hundreds of thousands of years. in fact the amount of summer sunshine on the northern hemisphere which is affected by changes in the planets orbit appears to drive the advance and retreat of ice sheets. these changes appear to be the primary cause of past cycles of ice ages in which earth has experienced long periods of cold temperatures as well as shorter interglacial periods of relatively warmer temperatures. click to learn about how rates of climate change have varied over time. changes in solar energy continue to affect climate. however over the last year solar cycle solar output has been lower than it has been since the mid century and therefore does not explain the recent warming of the earth. similarly changes in the shape of earths orbit as well as the tilt and position of earths axis affect temperature on very long timescales and therefore can not explain the recent warming. when sunlight reaches earth it can be reflected or absorbed. the amount that is reflected or absorbed depends on earths surface and atmosphere. light colored objects and surfaces like snow and clouds tend to reflect most sunlight while darker objects and surfaces like the ocean forests or soil tend to absorb more sunlight. the term albedo refers to the amount of solar radiation reflected from an object or surface often expressed as a percentage. earth as a whole has an albedo of about meaning that of the sunlight that reaches the planet is absorbed. absorbed sunlight warms earths land water and atmosphere. reflectivity is also affected by aerosols. aerosols are small particles or liquid droplets in the atmosphere that can absorb or reflect sunlight. unlike greenhouse gases the climate effects of aerosols vary depending on what they are made of and where they are emitted. those aerosols that reflect sunlight such as particles from volcanic eruptions or sulfur emissions from burning coal have a cooling effect. those that absorb sunlight such as black carbon have a warming effect. natural changes in reflectivity like the melting of sea ice have contributed to climate change in the past often acting as feedbacks to other processes. volcanoes have played a noticeable role in climate. volcanic particles that reach the upper atmosphere can reflect enough sunlight back to space to cool the surface of the planet by a few tenths of a degree for several years. these particles are an example of cooling aerosols. volcanic particles from a single eruption do not produce long term change because they remain in the atmosphere for a much shorter time than ghgs. human changes in land use and land cover have changed earths reflectivity. processes such as deforestation reforestation desertification and urbanization often contribute to changes in climate in the places they occur. these effects may be significant regionally but are smaller when averaged over the entire globe. in addition human activities have generally increased the number of aerosol particles in the atmosphere. overall human generated aerosols have a net cooling effect offsetting about one third of the total warming effect associated with human greenhouse gas emissions. reductions in overall aerosol emissions can therefore lead to more warming. however targeted reductions in black carbon emissions can reduce warming. top of page usgcrp. climate change impacts in the united states the third national climate assessment. richmond and gary w. yohe eds. u. s. global change research program. ipcc. climate change the physical science basis. contribution of working group i to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. cambridge university press cambridge united kingdom and new york ny usa. nrc. advancing the science of climate changes. national research council. the national academies press washington dc usa. top of pagestudies of earths past climate suggest periods of relative stability as well as periods of rapid change. periods of relative stability interglacial climate periods such as the present tend to be more stable than cooler glacial climates. for example earths climate during the current interglacial period is more stable than the most recent glacial period. the glacial period was characterized by widespread large and abrupt climate changes. in contrast the previous interglacial period was similarly stable. periods of abrupt climate change abrupt climate change refers to sudden large changes in some major component of the climate system with rapid widespread effects. abrupt or rapid climate changes tend to frequently accompany transitions between glacial and interglacial periods. for example a significant part of the northern hemisphere particularly around greenland may have experienced very rapid warming of f f over several decades during and after the most recent ice age. abrupt climate changes occur when a threshold or tipping point in the climate system is crossed causing large changes or impacts to the climate. scientific data show that abrupt changes in climate at the regional scale have occurred throughout history and are characteristic of earths climate system. warming from greenhouse gas emissions as well as other human changes to the earth system may increase the possibility of large and abrupt regional or global climatic events. contact us to ask a question provide feedback or report a problem. last updated on december ontemporary climate change includes both the global warming caused by humans and its impacts on earths weather patterns. there have been previous periods of climate change but the current changes are more rapid than any known events in earths history. the main cause is the emission of greenhouse gases mostly carbon dioxide and methane. burning fossil fuels for energy use creates most of these emissions. agriculture steel making cement production and forest loss are additional sources. temperature rise is also affected by climate feedbacks such as the loss of sunlight reflecting snow cover and the release of carbon dioxide from drought stricken forests. collectively these amplify global warming. on land temperatures have risen about twice as fast as the global average. deserts are expanding while heat waves and wildfires are becoming more common. increased warming in the arctic has contributed to melting permafrost glacial retreat and sea ice loss. higher temperatures are also causing more intense storms and other weather extremes. in places such as coral reefs mountains and the arctic many species are forced to relocate or become extinct as their environment changes. climate change threatens people with food and water scarcity increased flooding extreme heat more disease and economic loss. it can also drive human migration. the world health organization calls climate change the greatest threat to global health in the century. even if efforts to minimise future warming are successful some effects will continue for centuries. these include sea level rise and warmer more acidic oceans. many of these impacts are already felt at the current level of warming which is about. c. the intergovernmental panel on climate change projects even greater impacts as warming continues to. c and beyond. additional warming also increases the risk of triggering tipping points such as the melting of the greenland ice sheet. responding to these changes involves taking actions to limit the amount of warming and adapting to them. future warming can be reduced by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and removing them from the atmosphere. this will involve using more wind and solar energy phasing out coal and increasing energy efficiency. switching to electric vehicles to public transport and to heat pumps for homes and commercial buildings would further limit emissions. prevention of deforestation and enhancing forests can help absorb co. some communities may adapt to climate change through better coastline protection disaster management and development of more resistant crops. by themselves these efforts to adapt can not avert the risk of severe widespread and permanent impacts. under the paris agreement nations collectively agreed to keep warming well under c through mitigation efforts. however with pledges made under the agreement global warming would still reach about. c by the end of the century. limiting warming to. c would require halving emissions by and achieving net zero emissions by. before the s it was unclear whether warming by greenhouse gases would dominate aerosol induced cooling. scientists then often used the term inadvertent climate modification to refer to the human impact on the climate. in the s the terms global warming and climate change were popularised. the former refers only to increased surface warming the latter describes the full effect of greenhouse gases on the climate. global warming became the most popular term after nasa climate scientist james hansen used it in his testimony in the u. s. senate. in the s the term climate change increased in popularity. global warming usually refers to human induced warming of the earth system whereas climate change can refer to natural or anthropogenic change. the two terms are often used interchangeably. various scientists politicians and media figures have adopted the terms climate crisis or climate emergency to talk about climate change and global heating instead of global warming. the policy editor in chief of the guardian said they included this language in their editorial guidelines to ensure that we are being scientifically precise while also communicating clearly with readers on this very important issue. in oxford languages chose climate emergency as its word of the year defining it as a situation in which urgent action is required to reduce or halt climate change and avoid potentially irreversible environmental damage resulting from it. multiple independent instrumental datasets show that the climate system is warming. the decade warmed. c compared to the pre industrial baseline. surface temperatures are rising by about. c per decade with reaching a temperature of. c above pre industrial. since the number of cold days and nights has decreased and the number of warm days and nights has increased. there was little net warming between the century and the mid century. climate information for that period comes from climate proxies such as trees and ice cores. they show that natural variations offset the early effects of the industrial revolution. thermometer records began to provide global coverage around. historical patterns of warming and cooling like the medieval climate anomaly and the little ice age did not occur at the same time across different regions. temperatures may have reached as high as those of the late century in a limited set of regions. there have been prehistorical episodes of global warming such as the paleoceneeocene thermal maximum. however the modern observed rise in temperature and co concentrations has been so rapid that even abrupt geophysical events in earths history do not approach current rates. evidence of warming from air temperature measurements are reinforced with a wide range of other observations. there has been an increase in the frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation melting of snow and land ice and increased atmospheric humidity. flora and fauna are also behaving in a manner consistent with warming for instance plants are flowering earlier in spring. another key indicator is the cooling of the upper atmosphere which demonstrates that greenhouse gases are trapping heat near the earths surface and preventing it from radiating into space. regions warm at various rates. the pattern is independent of where greenhouse gases are emitted because the gases persist long enough to diffuse across the planet. since the pre industrial period the average surface temperature over land regions has increased almost twice as fast as the global average surface temperature. this is because of the larger heat capacity of oceans and because oceans lose more heat by evaporation. the thermal energy in the global climate system has grown with only brief pauses since at least and over of this extra energy has been stored in the ocean. the rest has heated the atmosphere melted ice and warmed the continents. the northern hemisphere and the north pole have warmed much faster than the south pole and southern hemisphere. the northern hemisphere not only has much more land but also more seasonal snow cover and sea ice. as these surfaces flip from reflecting a lot of light to being dark after the ice has melted they start absorbing more heat. local black carbon deposits on snow and ice also contribute to arctic warming. arctic temperatures are increasing at over twice the rate of the rest of the world. melting of glaciers and ice sheets in the arctic disrupts ocean circulation including a weakened gulf stream further changing the climate. the climate system experiences various cycles on its own which can last for years decades or even centuries. other changes are caused by an imbalance of energy that is external to the climate system but not always external to the earth. examples of external forcings include changes in the concentrations of greenhouse gases solar luminosity volcanic eruptions and variations in the earths orbit around the sun. to determine the human contribution to climate change known internal climate variability and natural external forcings need to be ruled out. a key approach is to determine unique fingerprints for all potential causes then compare these fingerprints with observed patterns of climate change. for example solar forcing can be ruled out as a major cause. its fingerprint would be warming in the entire atmosphere. yet only the lower atmosphere has warmed consistent with greenhouse gas forcing. attribution of recent climate change shows that the main driver is elevated greenhouse gases but that aerosols also have a strong effect. the earth absorbs sunlight then radiates it as heat. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb and reemit infrared radiation slowing the rate at which it can pass through the atmosphere and escape into space. before the industrial revolution naturally occurring amounts of greenhouse gases caused the air near the surface to be about c warmer than it would have been in their absence. while water vapour and clouds are the biggest contributors to the greenhouse effect they increase as a function of temperature and are therefore feedbacks. on the other hand concentrations of gases such as co tropospheric ozone cfcs and nitrous oxide are not temperature dependent and are therefore external forcings. human activity since the industrial revolution mainly extracting and burning fossil fuels has increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere resulting in a radiative imbalance. in the concentrations of co and methane had increased by about and respectively since. these co levels are higher than they have been at any time during the last million years. concentrations of methane are far higher than they were over the last years. global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in excluding those from land use change were equivalent to billion tonnes of co. of these emissions was co was methane was nitrous oxide and was fluorinated gases. co emissions primarily come from burning fossil fuels to provide energy for transport manufacturing heating and electricity. additional co emissions come from deforestation and industrial processes which include the co released by the chemical reactions for making cement steel aluminum and fertiliser. methane emissions come from livestock manure rice cultivation landfills wastewater and coal mining as well as oil and gas extraction. nitrous oxide emissions largely come from the microbial decomposition of inorganic and organic fertiliser. from a production standpoint the primary sources of global greenhouse gas emissions are estimated as electricity and heat agriculture and forestry industry and manufacturing transport and buildings. despite the contribution of deforestation to greenhouse gas emissions the earths land surface particularly its forests remain a significant carbon sink for co. natural processes such as carbon fixation in the soil and photosynthesis more than offset the greenhouse gas contributions from deforestation. the land surface sink is estimated to remove about of annual global co emissions. the ocean also serves as a significant carbon sink via a two step process. first co dissolves in the surface water. afterwards the oceans overturning circulation distributes it deep into the oceans interior where it accumulates over time as part of the carbon cycle. over the last two decades the worlds oceans have absorbed to of emitted co. air pollution in the form of aerosols not only puts a large burden on human health but also affects the climate on a large scale. from to a gradual reduction in the amount of sunlight reaching the earths surface was observed a phenomenon popularly known as global dimming typically attributed to aerosols from biofuel and fossil fuel burning. globally aerosols have been declining since meaning that they no longer mask greenhouse gas warming as much. aerosols scatter and absorb solar radiation. they also have indirect effects on the earths radiation budget. sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets. these clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets. they also reduce the growth of raindrops which makes clouds more reflective to incoming sunlight. indirect effects of aerosols are the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing. while aerosols typically limit global warming by reflecting sunlight black carbon in soot that falls on snow or ice can contribute to global warming. not only does this increase the absorption of sunlight it also increases melting and sea level rise. limiting new black carbon deposits in the arctic could reduce global warming by. c by. humans change the earths surface mainly to create more agricultural land. today agriculture takes up of earths land area while is forests and is uninhabitable. the amount of forested land continues to decrease largely due to conversion to cropland in the tropics. this deforestation is the most significant aspect of land surface change affecting global warming. the main causes of deforestation are permanent land use change from forest to agricultural land producing products such as beef and palm oil logging to produce forestry forest products short term shifting cultivation and wildfires. land use changes not only affect greenhouse gas emissions. the type of vegetation in a region affects the local temperature. it impacts how much of the sunlight gets reflected back into space and how much heat is lost by evaporation. for instance the change from a dark forest to grassland makes the surface lighter causing it to reflect more sunlight. deforestation can also affect temperatures by modifying the release of chemical compounds that influence clouds and by changing wind patterns. in tropic and temperate areas the net effect is to produce significant warming while at latitudes closer to the poles a gain of albedo leads to a cooling effect. globally these effects are estimated to have led to a slight cooling dominated by an increase in surface albedo. physical climate models are unable to reproduce the rapid warming observed in recent decades when taking into account only variations in solar output and volcanic activity. as the sun is the earths primary energy source changes in incoming sunlight directly affect the climate system. solar irradiance has been measured directly by satellites and indirect measurements are available from the early s onwards. there has been no upward trend in the amount of the suns energy reaching the earth. further evidence for greenhouse gases causing global warming comes from measurements that show a warming of the lower atmosphere coupled with a cooling of the upper atmosphere. if solar variations were responsible for the observed warming the troposphere and stratosphere would both warm. explosive volcanic eruptions represent the largest natural forcing over the industrial era. when the eruption is sufficiently strong sunlight can be partially blocked for a couple of years. the temperature signal lasts about twice as long. in the industrial era volcanic activity has had negligible impacts on global temperature trends. present day volcanic co emissions are equivalent to less than of current anthropogenic co emissions. the response of the climate system to an initial forcing is modified by feedbacks increased by self reinforcing feedbacks and reduced by balancing feedbacks. the main reinforcing feedbacks are the water vapour feedback the icealbedo feedback and probably the net effect of clouds. the primary balancing mechanism is radiative cooling as earths surface gives off more heat to space in response to rising temperature. in addition to temperature feedbacks there are feedbacks in the carbon cycle such as the fertilizing effect of co on plant growth. uncertainty over feedbacks is the major reason why different climate models project different magnitudes of warming for a given amount of emissions. as air gets warmer it can hold more moisture. after initial warming due to emissions of greenhouse gases the atmosphere will hold more water. water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas so this further heats the atmosphere. if cloud cover increases more sunlight will be reflected back into space cooling the planet. if clouds become higher and thinner they act as an insulator reflecting heat from below back downwards and warming the planet. overall the net cloud feedback over the industrial era has probably exacerbated temperature rise. the reduction of snow cover and sea ice in the arctic reduces the albedo of the earths surface. more of the suns energy is now absorbed in these regions contributing to amplification of arctic temperature changes. arctic amplification is also melting permafrost which releases methane and co into the atmosphere. around half of human caused co emissions have been absorbed by land plants and by the oceans. on land elevated co and an extended growing season have stimulated plant growth. climate change increases droughts and heat waves that inhibit plant growth which makes it uncertain whether this carbon sink will continue to grow in the future. soils contain large quantities of carbon and may release some when they heat up. as more co and heat are absorbed by the ocean it acidifies its circulation changes and phytoplankton takes up less carbon decreasing the rate at which the ocean absorbs atmospheric carbon. climate change can increase methane emissions from wetlands marine and freshwater systems and permafrost. future warming depends on the strengths of climate feedbacks and on emissions of greenhouse gases. the former are often estimated using climate models developed by multiple scientific institutions. a climate model is a representation of the physical chemical and biological processes that affect the climate system. models include changes in the earths orbit historical changes in the suns activity and volcanic forcing. computer models attempt to reproduce and predict the circulation of the oceans the annual cycle of the seasons and the flows of carbon between the land surface and the atmosphere. models project different future temperature rises for given emissions of greenhouse gases they do not fully agree on the strength of different feedbacks on climate sensitivity and magnitude of inertia of the climate system. the physical realism of models is tested by examining their ability to simulate contemporary or past climates. past models have underestimated the rate of arctic shrinkage and underestimated the rate of precipitation increase. sea level rise since was underestimated in older models but more recent models agree well with observations. the united states published national climate assessment notes that climate models may still be underestimating or missing relevant feedback processes. a subset of climate models add societal factors to a simple physical climate model. these models simulate how population economic growth and energy use affect and interact with the physical climate. with this information these models can produce scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions. this is then used as input for physical climate models to generate climate change projections. in some scenarios emissions continue to rise over the century while others have reduced emissions. fossil fuel resources are too abundant for shortages to be relied on to limit carbon emissions in the century. emissions scenarios can be combined with modelling of the carbon cycle to predict how atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases might change in the future. according to these combined models by the atmospheric concentration of co could be as low as or as high as ppm depending on the socioeconomic scenario and the mitigation scenario. the ipcc sixth assessment report projects that global warming is very likely to reach. c to. c by the late century under the very low ghg emissions scenario. in an intermediate scenario global warming would reach. c to. c and. c to. c under the very high ghg emissions scenario. these projections are based on climate models in combination with observations. the remaining carbon budget is determined by modelling the carbon cycle and the climate sensitivity to greenhouse gases. according to the ipcc global warming can be kept below. c with a two thirds chance if emissions after do not exceed or gigatonnes of co. this corresponds to to years of current emissions. there are high uncertainties about the budget. for instance it may be gigatonnes of co smaller due to methane release from permafrost and wetlands. the environmental effects of climate change are broad and far reaching affecting oceans ice and weather. changes may occur gradually or rapidly. evidence for these effects comes from studying climate change in the past from modelling and from modern observations. since the s droughts and heat waves have appeared simultaneously with increasing frequency. extremely wet or dry events within the monsoon period have increased in india and east asia. the rainfall rate and intensity of hurricanes and typhoons is likely increasing. frequency of tropical cyclones has not increased as a result of climate change. global sea level is rising as a consequence of glacial melt melt of the ice sheets in greenland and antarctica and thermal expansion. between and the rise increased over time averaging.. mm per year. over the century the ipcc projects that in a very high emissions scenario the sea level could rise by cm. increased ocean warmth is undermining and threatening to unplug antarctic glacier outlets risking a large melt of the ice sheet and the possibility of a meter sea level rise by under high emissions. climate change has led to decades of shrinking and thinning of the arctic sea ice. while ice free summers are expected to be rare at. c degrees of warming they are set to occur once every three to ten years at a warming level of c. higher atmospheric co concentrations have led to changes in ocean chemistry. an increase in dissolved co is causing oceans to acidify. in addition oxygen levels are decreasing as oxygen is less soluble in warmer water. dead zones in the ocean regions with very little oxygen are expanding too. the greater the amount of global warming the greater the risk of passing through tipping points thresholds beyond which certain impacts can no longer be avoided even if temperatures are reduced. an example is the collapse of west antarctic and greenland ice sheets where a temperature rise of. to c may commit the ice sheets to melt although the time scale of melt is uncertain and depends on future warming. some large scale changes could occur over a short time period such as a collapse of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation which would trigger major climate changes in the north atlantic europe and north america. the long term effects of climate change include further ice melt ocean warming sea level rise and ocean acidification. on the timescale of centuries to millennia the magnitude of climate change will be determined primarily by anthropogenic co emissions. this is due to cos long atmospheric lifetime. oceanic co uptake is slow enough that ocean acidification will continue for hundreds to thousands of years. these emissions are estimated to have prolonged the current interglacial period by at least years. sea level rise will continue over many centuries with an estimated rise of. metres per degree celsius after years. recent warming has driven many terrestrial and freshwater species poleward and towards higher altitudes. higher atmospheric co levels and an extended growing season have resulted in global greening. however heatwaves and drought have reduced ecosystem productivity in some regions. the future balance of these opposing effects is unclear. climate change has contributed to the expansion of drier climate zones such as the expansion of deserts in the subtropics. the size and speed of global warming is making abrupt changes in ecosystems more likely. overall it is expected that climate change will result in the extinction of many species. the oceans have heated more slowly than the land but plants and animals in the ocean have migrated towards the colder poles faster than species on land. just as on land heat waves in the ocean occur more frequently due to climate change harming a wide range of organisms such as corals kelp and seabirds. ocean acidification makes it harder for organisms such as mussels barnacles and corals to produce shells and skeletons and heatwaves have bleached coral reefs. harmful algal blooms enhanced by climate change and eutrophication lower oxygen levels disrupt food webs and cause great loss of marine life. coastal ecosystems are under particular stress. almost half of global wetlands have disappeared due to climate change and other human impacts. ecological collapse. bleaching has damaged the great barrier reef and threatens reefs worldwide. extreme weather. drought and high temperatures worsened the bushfires in australia. arctic warming. permafrost thaws undermine infrastructure and release methane a greenhouse gas. habitat destruction. many arctic animals rely on sea ice which has been disappearing in a warming arctic. pest propagation. mild winters allow more pine beetles to survive to kill large swaths of forest. the effects of climate change on humans mostly due to warming and shifts in precipitation have been detected worldwide. impacts are now observable on all continents and across ocean regions with low latitude less developed areas facing the greatest risk. continued warming has potentially severe pervasive and irreversible impacts for people and ecosystems. the risks are unevenly distributed but are generally greater for disadvantaged people in developing and developed countries. health impacts include both the direct effects of extreme weather leading to injury and loss of life and indirect effects such as undernutrition brought on by crop failures. various infectious diseases are more easily transmitted in a warmer climate such as dengue fever which affects children most severely and malaria. young children are the most vulnerable to food shortages and together with older people to extreme heat. the world health organization has estimated that between and climate change is expected to cause around additional deaths per year from heat exposure in elderly people increases in diarrheal disease malaria dengue coastal flooding and childhood undernutrition. over additional adult deaths are projected yearly by due to reductions in food availability and quality. other major health risks associated with climate change include air and water quality. the who has classified human impacts from climate change as the greatest threat to global health in the century. climate change is affecting food security. it has caused reduction in global mean yields of maize wheat and soybeans between and. future warming could further reduce global yields of major crops. crop production will probably be negatively affected in low latitude countries while effects at northern latitudes may be positive or negative. up to an additional million people worldwide particularly those with lower incomes are at risk of hunger as a consequence of these impacts. the effects of warming on the oceans impact fish stocks with a global decline in the maximum catch potential. only polar stocks are showing an increased potential. regions dependent on glacier water regions that are already dry and small islands are at increased risk of water stress due to climate change. economic damages due to climate change may be severe and there is a probability of disastrous tail risk events. climate change has likely already increased global economic inequality and this trend is projected to continue. most of the severe impacts are expected in sub saharan africa and south east asia where existing poverty is already exacerbated. the world bank estimates that climate change could drive over million people into poverty by. current inequalities between men and women between rich and poor and between different ethnicities have been observed to worsen as a consequence of climate variability and climate change. an expert elicitation concluded that the role of climate change in armed conflict has been small compared to factors such as socio economic inequality and state capabilities but that future warming will bring increasing risks. low lying islands and coastal communities are threatened through hazards posed by sea level rise such as flooding and permanent submergence. this could lead to statelessness for populations in island nations such as the maldives and tuvalu. in some regions rise in temperature and humidity may be too severe for humans to adapt to. with worst case climate change models project that almost one third of humanity might live in extremely hot and uninhabitable climates similar to the current climate found in the sahara. these factors plus weather extremes can drive environmental migration both within and between countries. displacement of people is expected to increase as a consequence of more frequent extreme weather sea level rise and conflict arising from increased competition over natural resources. climate change may also increase vulnerability leading to trapped populations who are not able to move due to a lack of resources. environmental migration. sparser rainfall leads to desertification that harms agriculture and can displace populations. shown telly mali. agricultural changes. droughts rising temperatures and extreme weather negatively impact agriculture. shown texas us. tidal flooding. sea level rise increases flooding in low lying coastal regions. shown venice italy. storm intensification. bangladesh after cyclone sidr is an example of catastrophic flooding from increased rainfall. heat wave intensification. events like the june european heat wave are becoming more common. climate change can be mitigated by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and by enhancing sinks that absorb greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. in order to limit global warming to less than. c with a high likelihood of success global greenhouse gas emissions needs to be net zero by or by with a c target. this requires far reaching systemic changes on an unprecedented scale in energy land cities transport buildings and industry. the united nations environment programme estimates that countries need to triple their pledges under the paris agreement within the next decade to limit global warming to c. an even greater level of reduction is required to meet the. c goal. with pledges made under the agreement as of october global warming would still have a chance of reaching about. c by the end of the century. although there is no single pathway to limit global warming to. or c most scenarios and strategies see a major increase in the use of renewable energy in combination with increased energy efficiency measures to generate the needed greenhouse gas reductions. to reduce pressures on ecosystems and enhance their carbon sequestration capabilities changes would also be necessary in agriculture and forestry such as preventing deforestation and restoring natural ecosystems by reforestation. other approaches to mitigating climate change have a higher level of risk. scenarios that limit global warming to. c typically project the large scale use of carbon dioxide removal methods over the century. there are concerns though about over reliance on these technologies and environmental impacts. solar radiation management is also a possible supplement to deep reductions in emissions. however srm would raise significant ethical and legal issues and the risks are poorly understood. renewable energy is key to limiting climate change. fossil fuels accounted for of the worlds energy in. the remaining share was split between nuclear power and renewables. that mix is projected to change significantly over the next years. solar and wind have seen substantial growth and progress over the last few years. solar panels and onshore wind are the cheapest forms of adding new power generation capacity in most countries. renewables represented of all new electricity generation installed in nearly all solar and wind. meanwhile nuclear power share remains the same but costs are increasing. nuclear power generation is now several times more expensive per megawatt hour than wind and solar. to achieve carbon neutrality by renewable energy would become the dominant form of electricity generation rising to or more by in some scenarios. the use of electricity for heating and transport would rise to the point where electricity becomes the largest form of energy. investment in coal would be eliminated and coal use nearly phased out by. in transport scenarios envision sharp increases in the market share of electric vehicles of public transport and of a switch to low carbon fuel for other transportation modes like shipping. heating would be increasingly decarbonised with the use of technologies like heat pumps. there are obstacles to the continued rapid growth of renewables. for solar and wind power a key challenge is their intermittency and seasonal variability. traditionally hydro dams with reservoirs and conventional power plants have been used when variable energy production is low. intermittency is further countered by expanding battery storage and matching energy demand and supply. long distance transmission can smooth variability of renewable output across wider geographic areas. there can be environmental and land use concerns with large solar and wind projects while bioenergy is often not carbon neutral and may have negative consequences for food security. hydropower growth has been slowing and is set to decline further due to concerns about social and environmental impacts. low carbon energy improves human health by minimising climate change and has the near term benefit of reducing air pollution deaths which were estimated at million annually in. meeting the paris agreement goals that limit warming to a c increase could save about a million of those lives per year by whereas limiting global warming to. c could save millions and simultaneously increase energy security and reduce poverty. reducing energy demand is another major aspect of reducing emissions. if less energy is needed there is more flexibility for clean energy development. it also makes it easier to manage the electricity grid and minimises carbon intensive infrastructure development. major increases in energy efficiency investment will be required to achieve climate goals comparable to the level of investment in renewable energy. several covid related changes in energy use patterns energy efficiency investments and funding have made forecasts for this decade more difficult and uncertain. strategies to reduce energy demand vary by sector. in transport passengers and freight can switch to more efficient travel modes such as buses and trains or use electric vehicles. industrial strategies to reduce energy demand include increasing the energy efficiency of heating systems and motors designing less energy intensive products and increasing product lifetimes. in the building sector the focus is on better design of new buildings and aiming for higher levels of energy efficiency in retrofitting. the use of technologies like heat pumps can also increase building energy efficiency. agriculture and forestry face a triple challenge of limiting greenhouse gas emissions preventing the further conversion of forests to agricultural land and meeting increases in world food demand. a set of actions could reduce agriculture and forestry based emissions by two thirds from levels. these include reducing growth in demand for food and other agricultural products increasing land productivity protecting and restoring forests and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural production. steel and cement production responsible for about of industrial co emissions present particular challenges. in these industries carbon intensive materials such as coke and lime play an integral role in the production so that reducing co emissions requires research into alternative chemistries. natural carbon sinks can be enhanced to sequester significantly larger amounts of co beyond naturally occurring levels. reforestation and tree planting on non forest lands are among the most mature sequestration techniques although the latter raises food security concerns. soil carbon sequestration and coastal carbon sequestration are less understood options. the feasibility of land based negative emissions methods for mitigation are uncertain the ipcc has described mitigation strategies based on them as risky. where energy production or co intensive heavy industries continue to produce waste co the gas can be captured and stored instead of released to the atmosphere. although its current use is limited in scale and expensive carbon capture and storage may be able to play a significant role in limiting co emissions by mid century. this technique in combination with bio energy can result in net negative emissions co is drawn from the atmosphere. it remains highly uncertain whether carbon dioxide removal techniques such as beccs will be able to play a large role in limiting warming to. c. policy decisions that rely on carbon dioxide removal increase the risk of global warming rising beyond international goals. adaptation is the process of adjustment to current or expected changes in climate and its effects. without additional mitigation adaptation can not avert the risk of severe widespread and irreversible impacts. more severe climate change requires more transformative adaptation which can be prohibitively expensive. the capacity and potential for humans to adapt is unevenly distributed across different regions and populations and developing countries generally have less. the first two decades of the century saw an increase in adaptive capacity in most low and middle income countries with improved access to basic sanitation and electricity but progress is slow. many countries have implemented adaptation policies. however there is a considerable gap between necessary and available finance. adaptation to sea level rise consists of avoiding at risk areas learning to live with increased flooding and protection. if that fails managed retreat may be needed. there are economic barriers for tackling dangerous heat impact. avoiding strenuous work or having air conditioning is not possible for everybody. in agriculture adaptation options include a switch to more sustainable diets diversification erosion control and genetic improvements for increased tolerance to a changing climate. insurance allows for risk sharing but is often difficult to get for people on lower incomes. education migration and early warning systems can reduce climate vulnerability. ecosystems adapt to climate change a process that can be supported by human intervention. by increasing connectivity between ecosystems species can migrate to more favourable climate conditions. species can also be directly moved. protection and restoration of natural and semi natural areas helps build resilience making it easier for ecosystems to adapt. many of the actions that promote adaptation in ecosystems also help humans adapt via ecosystem based adaptation. for instance restoration of natural fire regimes makes catastrophic fires less likely and reduces human exposure. giving rivers more space allows for more water storage in the natural system reducing flood risk. restored forest acts as a carbon sink but planting trees in unsuitable regions can exacerbate climate impacts. there are synergies and trade offs between adaptation and mitigation. adaptation often offer short term benefits whereas mitigation has longer term benefits. increased use of air conditioning allows people to better cope with heat but increases energy demand. compact urban development may lead to reduced emissions from transport and construction. at the same time it may increase the urban heat island effect leading to higher temperatures and increased exposure. increased food productivity has large benefits for both adaptation and mitigation. countries that are most vulnerable to climate change have typically been responsible for a small share of global emissions. this raises questions about justice and fairness. climate change is strongly linked to sustainable development. limiting global warming makes it easier to achieve sustainable development goals such as eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities. the connection is recognised in sustainable development goal which is to ake urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. the goals on food clean water and ecosystem protection have synergies with climate mitigation. the geopolitics of climate change is complex. it has often been framed as a free rider problem in which all countries benefit from mitigation done by other countries but individual countries would lose from switching to a low carbon economy themselves. this framing has been challenged. for instance the benefits of a coal phase out to public health and local environments exceed the costs in almost all regions. furthermore net importers of fossil fuels win economically from switching to clean energy causing net exporters to face stranded assets fossil fuels they can not sell. a wide range of policies regulations and laws are being used to reduce emissions. as of carbon pricing covers about of global greenhouse gas emissions. carbon can be priced with carbon taxes and emissions trading systems. direct global fossil fuel subsidies reached billion in and. trillion when indirect costs such as air pollution are priced in. ending these can cause a reduction in global carbon emissions and a reduction in air pollution deaths. subsidies could be used to support the transition to clean energy instead. more direct methods to reduce greenhouse gases include vehicle efficiency standards renewable fuel standards and air pollution regulations on heavy industry. several countries require utilities to increase the share of renewables in power production. policy designed through the lens of climate justice tries to address human rights issues and social inequality. for instance wealthy nations responsible for the largest share of emissions would have to pay poorer countries to adapt. as the use of fossil fuels is reduced jobs in the sector are being lost. to achieve a just transition these people would need to be retrained for other jobs. communities with many fossil fuel workers would need additional investments. nearly all countries in the world are parties to the united nations framework convention on climate change. the goal of the unfccc is to prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system. as stated in the convention this requires that greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilised in the atmosphere at a level where ecosystems can adapt naturally to climate change food production is not threatened and economic development can be sustained. the unfccc does not itself restrict emissions but rather provides a framework for protocols that do. global emissions have risen since the unfccc was signed. its yearly conferences are the stage of global negotiations. the kyoto protocol extended the unfccc and included legally binding commitments for most developed countries to limit their emissions. during the negotiations the g pushed for a mandate requiring developed countries to the lead in reducing their emissions since developed countries contributed most to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. per capita emissions were also still relatively low in developing countries and developing countries would need to emit more to meet their development needs. theopenhagen accord has been widely portrayed as disappointing because of its low goals and was rejected by poorer nations including the g. associated parties aimed to limit the global temperature rise to below c. the accord set the goal of sending billion per year to developing countries for mitigation and adaptation by and proposed the founding of the green climate fund. as of the fund has failed to reach its expected target and risks a shrinkage in its funding. in all un countries negotiated the paris agreement which aims to keep global warming well below. c and contains an aspirational goal of keeping warming under. c. the agreement replaced the kyoto protocol. unlike kyoto no binding emission targets were set in the paris agreement. instead a set of procedures was made binding. countries have to regularly set ever more ambitious goals and reevaluate these goals every five years. the paris agreement restated that developing countries must be financially supported. as of october states and the european union have signed the treaty and states and the eu have ratified or acceded to the agreement. the montreal protocol an international agreement to stop emitting ozone depleting gases may have been more effective at curbing greenhouse gas emissions than the kyoto protocol specifically designed to do so. the kigali amendment to the montreal protocol aims to reduce the emissions of hydrofluorocarbons a group of powerful greenhouse gases which served as a replacement for banned ozone depleting gases. this made the montreal protocol a stronger agreement against climate change. in the united kingdom parliament became the first national government to declare a climate emergency. other countries and jurisdictions followed suit. that same year the european parliament declared a climate and environmental emergency. the european commission presented its european green deal with the goal of making the eu carbon neutral by. major countries in asia have made similar pledges south korea and japan have committed to become carbon neutral by and china by. in the european commission released its fit for legislation package which contains guidelines for the car industry all new cars on the european market must be zero emission vehicles from. while india has strong incentives for renewables it also plans a significant expansion of coal in the country. as of based on information from national climate plans which represent of the parties to the paris agreement estimated total greenhouse gas emissions will be. lower compared to levels below the or reduction goals to limit global warming to. c or c respectively. there is a near complete scientific consensus that the climate is warming and that this is caused by human activities. agreement in recent literature reached over. older surveys found to of climate scientists agreeing on humanitys role in causing climate change based on the exact question and who responded. no scientific body of national or international standing disagrees with this view. consensus has further developed that some form of action should be taken to protect people against the impacts of climate change. national science academies have called on world leaders to cut global emissions. scientific discussion takes place in journal articles that are peer reviewed. scientists assess these every few years in the intergovernmental panel on climate change reports. the ipcc assessment report stated that it is unequivocal that climate change is caused by humans. climate change came to international public attention in the late s. due to confusing media coverage in the early s people often confounded climate change with other environmental issues like ozone depletion. in popular culture the first movie to reach a mass public on the topic was the day after tomorrow in followed a few years later by the al gore documentary an inconvenient truth. books stories and films about climate change fall under the genre of climate fiction. significant regional gender age and political differences exist in both public concern for and understanding of climate change. more highly educated people and in some countries women and younger people were more likely to see climate change as a serious threat. partisan gaps also exist in many countries and countries with high co emissions tend to be less concerned. views on causes of climate change vary widely between countries. concern has increased over time to the point where a majority of citizens in many countries now express a high level of worry about climate change or view it as a global emergency. higher levels of worry are associated with stronger public support for policies that address climate change. public debate about climate change has been strongly affected by climate change denial and misinformation which originated in the united states and has since spread to other countries particularly canada and australia. the actors behind climate change denial form a well funded and relatively coordinated coalition of fossil fuel companies industry groups conservative think tanks and contrarian scientists. like the tobacco industry before the main strategy of these groups has been to manufacture doubt about scientific data and results. many who deny dismiss or hold unwarranted doubt about the scientific consensus on anthropogenic climate change are labelled as climate change skeptics which several scientists have noted is a misnomer. there are different variants of climate denial some deny that warming takes place at all some acknowledge warming but attribute it to natural influences and some minimise the negative impacts of climate change. manufacturing uncertainty about the science later developed into a manufactured controversy creating the belief that there is significant uncertainty about climate change within the scientific community in order to delay policy changes. strategies to promote these ideas include criticism of scientific institutions and questioning the motives of individual scientists. an echo chamber of climate denying blogs and media has further fomented misunderstanding of climate change. climate protests have risen in popularity in the s. these protests demand that political leaders take action to prevent climate change. they can take the form of public demonstrations fossil fuel divestment lawsuits and other activities. prominent demonstrations include the school strike for climate. in this initiative young people across the globe have been protesting since by skipping school on fridays inspired by swedish teenager greta thunberg. mass civil disobedience actions by groups like extinction rebellion have protested by disrupting roads and public transport. litigation is increasingly used as a tool to strengthen climate action from public institutions and companies. activists also initiate lawsuits which target governments and demand that they take ambitious action or enforce existing laws on climate change. lawsuits against fossil fuel companies generally seek compensation for loss and damage. in the s joseph fourier proposed the greenhouse effect to explain why earths temperature was higher than the suns energy alone could explain. earths atmosphere is transparent to sunlight so sunlight reaches the surface where it is converted to heat. however the atmosphere is not transparent to heat radiating from the surface and captures some of that heat which warms the planet. in eunice newton foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air and the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide. she concluded that an atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature... starting in john tyndall established that nitrogen and oxygentogether totalling of dry airare transparent to radiated heat. however water vapour and some gases absorb radiated heat and re radiate that heat within the atmosphere. tyndall proposed that changes in the concentrations of these gases may have caused climatic changes in the past including ice ages. svante arrhenius noted that water vapour in air continuously varied but the co concentration in air was influenced by long term geological processes. at the end of an ice age warming from increased co levels would increase the amount of water vapour amplifying warming in a feedback loop. in he published the first climate model of its kind showing that halving of co levels could have produced the drop in temperature initiating the ice age. arrhenius calculated the temperature increase expected from doubling co to be around c. other scientists were initially sceptical and believed the greenhouse effect to be saturated so that adding more co would make no difference. they thought climate would be self regulating. from onwards guy stewart callendar published evidence that climate was warming and co levels rising but his calculations met the same objections. in the s gilbert plass created a detailed computer model that included different atmospheric layers and the infrared spectrum. this model predicted that increasing co levels would cause warming. around the same time hans suess found evidence that co levels had been rising and roger revelle showed that the oceans would not absorb the increase. the two scientists subsequently helped charles keeling to begin a record of continued increase which has been termed the keeling curve. scientists alerted the public and the dangers were highlighted at james hansensongressional testimony. the intergovernmental panel on climate change set up in to provide formal advice to the worlds governments spurred interdisciplinary research. ar working group ii reportjump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. a since the industrial revolution the global annual temperature has increased in total by a little more than degree celsius or about degrees fahrenheit. between the year that accurate recordkeeping beganand it rose on average by. degrees celsius every years. since however the rate of increase has more than doubled for the last years we ve seen the global annual temperature rise by. degrees celsius or. degrees fahrenheit per decade. the result a planet that has never been hotter. nine of the warmest years since have occurred since and the warmest years on record have all occurred since. climate change deniers have argued that there has been a pause or a slowdown in rising global temperatures but numerous studies including a paper published in the journal environmental research letters have disproved this claim. the impacts of global warming are already harming people around the world. now climate scientists have concluded that we must limit global warming to. degrees celsius by if we are to avoid a future in which everyday life around the world is marked by its worst most devastating effects the extreme droughts wildfires floods tropical storms and other disasters that we refer to collectively as climate change. these effects are felt by all people in one way or another but are experienced most acutely by the underprivileged the economically marginalized and people of color for whom climate change is often a key driver of poverty displacement hunger and social unrest. a global warming occurs when carbon dioxide and other air pollutants collect in the atmosphere and absorb sunlight and solar radiation that have bounced off the earth s surface. normally this radiation would escape into space but these pollutants which can last for years to centuries in the atmosphere trap the heat and cause the planet to get hotter. these heat trapping pollutantsspecifically carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide water vapor and synthetic fluorinated gasesare known as greenhouse gases and their impact is called the greenhouse effect. though natural cycles and fluctuations have caused the earth s climate to change several times over the last years our current era of global warming is directly attributable to human activityspecifically to our burning of fossil fuels such as coal oil gasoline and natural gas which results in the greenhouse effect. in the united states the largest source of greenhouse gases is transportation followed closely by electricity production and industrial activity. curbing dangerous climate change requires very deep cuts in emissions as well as the use of alternatives to fossil fuels worldwide. the good news is that countries around the globe have formally committedas part of the paris climate agreementto lower their emissions by setting new standards and crafting new policies to meet or even exceed those standards. the not so good news is that we re not working fast enough. to avoid the worst impacts of climate change scientists tell us that we need to reduce global carbon emissions by as much as percent by. for that to happen the global community must take immediate concrete steps to decarbonize electricity generation by equitably transitioning from fossil fuelbased production to renewable energy sources like wind and solar to electrify our cars and trucks and to maximize energy efficiency in our buildings appliances and industries. a scientists agree that the earth s rising temperatures are fueling longer and hotter heat waves more frequent droughts heavier rainfall and more powerful hurricanes. in for example scientists concluded that a lengthy drought in californiathe state s worst water shortage in yearshad been intensified by to percent by global warming. they also said the odds of similar droughts happening in the future had roughly doubled over the past century. and in the national academies of science engineering and medicine announced that we can now confidently attribute some extreme weather events like heat waves droughts and heavy precipitation directly to climate change. the earth s ocean temperatures are getting warmer toowhich means that tropical storms can pick up more energy. in other words global warming has the ability to turn a category storm into a more dangerous category storm. in fact scientists have found that the frequency of north atlantic hurricanes has increased since the early s as has the number of storms that reach categories and. the atlantic hurricane season included a record breaking tropical storms major hurricanes and hurricanes altogether. with increased intensity come increased damage and death. the united states saw an unprecedented weather and climate disasters that caused at least a billion dollars worth of damage in but was the costliest on record and among the deadliest as well taken together that years tropical storms caused nearly billion in damage and led to more than fatalities. the impacts of global warming are being felt everywhere. extreme heat waves have caused tens of thousands of deaths around the world in recent years. and in an alarming sign of events to come antarctica has lost nearly four trillion metric tons of ice since the s. the rate of loss could speed up if we keep burning fossil fuels at our current pace some experts say causing sea levels to rise several meters in the next to years and wreaking havoc on coastal communities worldwide. a each year scientists learn more about the consequences of global warming and each year we also gain new evidence of its devastating impact on people and the planet. as the heat waves droughts and floods associated with climate change become more frequent and more intense communities suffer and death tolls rise. if we re unable to reduce our emissions scientists believe that climate change could lead to the deaths of more than people around the globe every year and force million people into poverty by. global warming is already taking a toll on the united states. and if we aren t able to get a handle on our emissions here s just a smattering of what we can look forward to though everyone is affected by climate change not everyone is affected equally. indigenous people people of color and the economically marginalized are typically hit the hardest. inequities built into our housing health care and labor systems make these communities more vulnerable to the worst impacts of climate changeeven though these same communities have done the least to contribute to it. a in recent years china has taken the lead in global warming pollution producing about percent of all co emissions. the united states comes in second. despite making up just percent of the world s population our nation produces a sobering percent of all global co emissionsnearly as much as the european union and india combined. and america is still number one by far in cumulative emissions over the past years. as a top contributor to global warming the united states has an obligation to help propel the world to a cleaner safer and more equitable future. our responsibility matters to other countries and it should matter to us too. a we ve started. but in order to avoid the worsening effects of climate change we need to do a lot moretogether with other countriesto reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and transition to clean energy sources. under the administration of president donald trump the united states withdrew from the paris climate agreement rolled back or eliminated dozens of clean air protections and opened up federally managed lands including culturally sacred national monuments to fossil fuel development. although president biden has pledged to get the country back on track years of inaction during and before the trump administrationand our increased understanding of global warming s serious impactsmean we must accelerate our efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. despite the lack of cooperation from the trump administration local and state governments made great strides during this period through efforts like the american cities climate challenge and ongoing collaborations like the regional greenhouse gas initiative. meanwhile industry and business leaders have been working with the public sector creating and adopting new clean energy technologies and increasing energy efficiency in buildings appliances and industrial processes. today the american automotive industry is finding new ways to produce cars and trucks that are more fuel efficient and is committing itself to putting more and more zero emission electric vehicles on the road. developers cities and community advocates are coming together to make sure that new affordable housing is built with efficiency in mind reducing energy consumption and lowering electric and heating bills for residents. and renewable energy continues to surge as the costs associated with its production and distribution keep falling. in renewable energy sources such as wind and solar provided more electricity than coal for the very first time in u. s. history. president biden has made action on global warming a high priority. on his first day in office he recommitted the united states to the paris climate agreement sending the world community a strong signal that we were determined to join other nations in cutting our carbon pollution to support the shared goal of preventing the average global temperature from rising more than. degrees celsius above preindustrial levels. and significantly the president has assembled a climate team of experts and advocates who have been tasked with pursuing action both abroad and at home while furthering the cause of environmental justice and investing in nature based solutions. a no while we can t win the fight without large scale government action at the national level we also can t do it without the help of individuals who are willing to use their voices hold government and industry leaders to account and make changes in their daily habits. wondering how you can be a part of the fight against global warming reduce your own carbon footprint by taking a few easy steps make conserving energy a part of your daily routine and your decisions as a consumer. when you shop for new appliances like refrigerators washers and dryers look for products with the government s energy star label they meet a higher standard for energy efficiency than the minimum federal requirements. when you buy a car look for one with the highest gas mileage and lowest emissions. you can also reduce your emissions by taking public transportation or carpooling when possible. and while new federal and state standards are a step in the right direction much more needs to be done. voice your support of climate friendly and climate change preparedness policies and tell your representatives that equitably transitioning from dirty fossil fuels to clean power should be a top prioritybecause it s vital to building healthy more secure communities. you don t have to go it alone either. movements across the country are showing how climate action can build community be led by those on the front lines of its impacts and create a future that s equitable and just for all. demand climate actionlearn morethis story was originally published on march and has been updated with new information and links. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. it s urgent. it s ambitious. but most of all it s totally doable. the western city of ahmedabad is preparing residents to cope with the longer and more intense heat waves sweeping across south asiaand inspiring other indian cities and states to follow suit. by increasing the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere we re amplifying the planet s natural greenhouse effect and turning up the dial on global warming. the most widespread damaging storms on earth are getting worse and climate change is a big reason why. here s a look at what causes hurricanes and how to address the threat of a wetter windier world. the u. n. report warns that dire impacts from climate change will arrive sooner than many expected. here s why we need to follow the report s advice and why every ton of emissions reductions can make a difference. healing the planet starts at homein your garage in your kitchen and at your dining room table. short answer yes. even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet. what is your city doing about climate change ask your local leaders these five questions. how smog soot greenhouse gases and other top air pollutants are affecting the planetand your health. as temperatures and carbon levels rise even breathing has become a challenge. here s what you can do to help clear the air. nrdc senior attorney ben longstreth explains how plaintiffs for these cases get chosenand how you can help advance the cause in or out of the courtroom. gun control activists want to use financial levers to curtail firearm sales. can we do the same for carbon emissions when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosurestogether for the environment. human healthwe all drink water that comes from a source this may be a lake or local river. in countries that have poor screening and purification practices people often get water borne disease outbreaks such as cholera and tuberculosis. every year there are an estimated million cholera cases and deaths due to cholera. in developed countries even where there are better purification methods people still suffer from the health effects of water pollution. take toxins emitted by algae growth for instance this can cause stomach aches and rashes. excess nitrogen in drinking water also poses serious risks to infants. epa s nationallakes assessment found that almost per cent of the nation s lakes have high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus pollution. the report also showed that poor lake conditions related to nitrogen or phosphorus pollution doubled the likelihood of poor ecosystem health.. ecosystemsnutrient pollution from upstream often flow downhill and even travel miles into other larger water bodies. the effect is that it breeds algae growth and causes the growth of many more water organism. this algae attack affects fish and other aquatic animals by absorbing and reducing their oxygen supply. algae growth also clogs fish gills. naturally the order of ecosystems in that water are affected negatively as the destruction or introduction of any foreign organism alter the entire food chain in there.. death of animalsanimals including water animals die when water is poisoned for various reasons. other animals are stressed and their populations are endangered. in a classic case of marine pollution in recent time miles of a us coastline was affected by an oil spill. that water pollution caused a lot of damage and deaths of many animals. over animals were reported dead just months after the spill including many that are already on the endangered species list. immediate impact on the wildlife includes oil coated birds and sea turtles mammal ingestion of oil and dead or dying deep sea coral. animals are also affected by solid waste thrown into water bodies as they harm them in many ways.. economic costfrom the above it is evident that there is some real financial implications that will result from water pollution. it can cost a lot more to purify drinking water that takes its source from nutrient polluted water bodies. fishing stock is affected negatively when there is a depletion of oxygen. consumers are also wary of fish from these sources and tend to stay away from them costing fisheries to lose revenue. in places where there are water activities or sports lots of money is spent to clean up the water from algae blooms and the like. the u. s. tourism industry loses close to billion each year mostly from losses in fishing and recreational activities because of nutrient polluted water bodies. in mississippi alone tourism in the three counties that border the gulf coast accounts for about. billion in visitor expenditures percent of state travel and tourism tax revenues and direct jobs. imagine this picture unep reports that around the world onethis is the idea of not making too much wasteconsidering the threats facing ecosystems we can begin to appreciateas long as humans live there will be the needopen access is an initiative that aims to make scientific research freely available to all. to date our community has made over million downloads. it s based on principles of collaboration unobstructed discovery and most importantly scientific progression. as phd students we found it difficult to access the research we needed so we decided to create a new open access publisher that levels the playing field for scientists across the world. how by making research easy to access and puts the academic needs of the researchers before the business interests of publishers. we are a community of more than authors and editors from institutions spanning countries including nobel prize winners and some of the world s most cited researchers. publishing on intechopen allows authors to earn citations and find new collaborators meaning more people see your work not only from your own field of study but from other related fields too. brief introduction to this section that descibes open access especially from an intechopen perspectivewant to get in touch contact our london head office or media team hereour team is growing all the time so we re always on the lookout for smart people who want to help us reshape the world of scientific publishing. open access peer reviewed chapterby inyinbor adejumoke a. adebesin babatunde o. oluyori abimbola p. adelani akande tabitha a. dada adewumi o. and oreofe toyin a. submitted april reviewed october published march doi. intechopen. home books water challenges of an urbanizing worlddownloaded the stress on our water environment as a result of increased industrialization which aids urbanization is becoming very high thus reducing the availability of clean water. polluted water is of great concern to the aquatic organism plants humans and climate and indeed alters the ecosystem. the preservation of our water environment which is embedded in sustainable development must be well driven by all sectors. while effective wastewater treatment has the tendency of salvaging the water environment integration of environmental policies into the actor firms core objectives coupled with continuous periodical enlightenment on the present and future consequences of environmental water pollution will greatly assist in conserving the water environment. address all correspondence to inyinbor. adejumoke landmarkuniversity. edu. ngdoi. intechopen. water challenges of an urbanizing worldedited by matja glavanindustrialization in any society is a major initiator of development and urbanization. although the merits of industrialization are innumerable it has been identified as a major threat to the environment as it releases various toxic chemicals gases solid wastes as well as microbes of various kinds into our immediate environmentland air and water. of particular interest is water pollution which has become a global challenge developing nations being highly affected due to their drive for development. pollution of our water bodies poses a great threat to humans and the aquatic ecosystem while marked population increase catalyzes climatic changes. for instance various human activities as well as the release of greenhouse gases by industries greatly contributes to global warming planet temperature enhancement and lowering of atmospheric air quality. the drive for sustainable development must bring along water pollution prevention techniques. effective wastewater treatment before their eventual discharge is one way to driving water pollution prevention. some remediate climate change mitigation measures against water pollution can also be explored. this chapter is aimed at critically discussing water pollution effects viz a viz global challenges threat and climatic impacts while also focusing on various possible preventive measures. sustainable development in any society is an access to initiate a good standard of living for the populace. it aims at providing solutions to the economic environmental and societal challenges without posing a threat to human and environmental future development that is we must consider the future as we make present decisions. also these include social progress and equality environmental protection conservation of natural resources and stable economic growth. there are numerous instances where urbanization has destroyed the environment and threatened its survival chances. sustainable development put into consideration how we survive in the natural world protecting it from destruction and damages. one of the major challenges of urbanization is sustainability as most developed or developing society now revitalizes a lot of natural resources daily. most of these resources meet the needs of man but they are also limited. sustainable development tends to balance the competing needs of the society. in achieving this many science bodies and institutions have seen the requisite of sustainable development and have set goals and targets to meet it. this also has pushed such institutions to have a role in measuring and monitoring the impact of these goals on the society. however the contribution of scientist in sustainable development should not only focus on the environment. it should also take into consideration the health of the populace in ensuring that no area of life suffers. while sustainable development may mean different things to different people environmental sustainability is all encompassing. it is directly concerned with the future of humanity and it defines how we should protect and handle the sustainability of resources air quality water quality and ecosystems. it also helps to prevent the environment from impending damage from technological advancement. one way to achieving environmental sustainability is via effective wastewater treatment. various conventional wastewater treatment methods are available their characteristics vary from complexities of operations through sludge generations among other things to various inadequacies. their economic disadvantages are widely related to expensive equipment complexities of operations and skilful manpower requirement. many industries avoid the conventional wastewater treatment methods due to their economic disadvantages hence discharging untreated or fairly treated wastewater into the water bodies. a simple and cheap wastewater treatment method will therefore facilitate effective wastewater treatment and protect the water environment from pollution. water is an essential and general need of life with an undeniable effect directly or indirectly. all industrial environmental and metabolic processes are water dependent. in living organisms water plays a number of roles such as solvent temperature buffer metabolite living environment and lubricants. water however is said to be polluted when some of the water quality parameters have been hampered by unguided and irregularities from several anthropogenic activities thus rendering water unfit for intended use. water pollution may pose serious threat to the environment as well as lives. pollutant effects may vary depending on their types and source. for instance while heavy metals dyes and some other organic pollutants have been identified as carcinogens hormones pharmaceuticals and cosmetics and personal care product wastes are known as endocrine disruptive chemicals. these pollutants which enter into the water body through various channel but predominantly anthropogenic have become a great concern to environmentalists due to various hazard they pose on the environment. heavy metals top the list of inorganic pollutant with wide range of negative effects on aquatic organisms plants and human. heavy metals are released into the environment via different routes such as industries mining activities agricultural activities etc.. bioavailable metals present in the soil may be absorbed by plants resulting in serious plant metabolism dysfunctioning. high heavy metal ion concentrations are also known to damage the cell membrane affect enzyme involved in chlorophyll production thus reducing photosynthetic rate as well as affect plant reproduction via decrease in pollen and seed viability. humans and animals can be exposed to heavy metal toxicity through the food web direct consumption of water containing metal or via inhalation. heavy metals readily bioaccumulates in vegetables and enters into man and animal through food chain. effects of heavy metal toxicity on human ranges from mild eye nose and skin irritations through severe headache stomach ache diarrhea hematemesis vomiting dizziness to organ dysfunctioning such as cirrhosis necrosis low blood pressure hypertension and gastrointestinal distress. while some heavy metals also called essential elements are required in minute amount in the body for various biochemical processes others such as lead cadmium arsenic and mercury are of serious threat and considered foreign in the body. looking at specifics human ingestion of water polluted with arsenic can cause cancer of the lungs liver and bladder. kidney and lungs damage as well as bone fragility may result when cadmium containing water is ingested. exposure to lead can severely damage the brain and kidneys. in children lead exposure even at very low concentration may hamper learning cause memory loss affect attention and response functions and generally make children aggressive. in pregnant women high levels of exposure to lead may cause miscarriage whereas in men it can damage the organs responsible for sperm production. mercury is unique amidst other heavy metals it has the capacity to travel a wide range of distance thus have been classified as a global pollutants. the chemical form of mercury in the environment is also important in analyzing their toxicity. the organic form of mercury that is methyl mercury and dimethyl mercury is known to be more toxic than inorganic mercury. while inhaled mercury goes into the blood stream their elimination from the body is either through the urine or faeces. mercury has the ability to exist in the urine for about months hence their renal dysfunctioning characteristic. many physiological disorders may accompany crustaceans exposure to metals and instant metabolic activities alterations. exposure of crustaceans to heavy metals may also result in loss of appetite for food and subsequently body weight loss. continuous exposure may reduce reproduction in adults as well as hamper the growth larvae. organic pollutants are very wide in variety with a huge range of toxicity. among the list of organic pollutants that has been of great threat to aquatic organisms plants and humans are dyes plant and animal pharmaceuticals personal care products wastes as well as petroleum organic pollutants. a group of chemicals referred to as endocrine disruptive chemicals also belongs to the organic pollutants group which are classed as emerging contaminants. edcs are described as external agents that interfere with hormonal activities thus affecting the normal homeostatic reproduction development or behavior. dyes are water soluble giant chemical that is greatly used in many industries viz textile leather and tanning food paper etc. to impact color on products. aquatic organisms plants and humans are greatly affected by dyes presence in water. they impede sunlight penetration into water bodies and reduce dissolved oxygen thus leading to death of photosynthetic organism and other lives within the aquatic environment. humans may be exposed to dye toxicity via consumption of vegetables and fish which bioaccumulate dyes. the use of colored paper towels used in drying hands and in food preparation is another route of exposure to human. dyes are considered as carcinogenic and mutagenic thus their removal from wastewater before disposal is ultimately important. human and veterinary pharmaceuticals which are members of edcs are chemicals used as curative or preventive of various diseases. veterinary pharmaceutical may also serve the purpose of increasing efficiency of food production. pharmaceuticals are used widely and unavoidably thus they enter into the environment through one of these routes indiscriminate disposal of hospital and household waste landfill leaching drainage water and sewage. although pharmaceuticals have been found to exist in various environmental samples at the ng l to g l levels it is considered a great threat to both aquatic lives and humans. the presence of pharmaceuticals in water is known to pose both acute and chronic toxicity on aquatic organisms. edcs as their name implies causes abnormal endocrine activities and increase cancer risk in human. their effects on aquatic lives may range from endocrine system disruption through the reduction in eggs and sperm cells production to feminization of female aquatics. water is one important part of our day to day activities and their preservation can never be overemphasized. three quarter of the fluid in man is made of water and it forms the essential medium in which the biochemical reactions take place in human body. water moves blood from one place to the other in the body and helps in digestion electrically charged ions which generate nerve signals that make the human brain possible are also held and transported by water. water is a good solvent and it is usually referred to as universal solvent all the major components in cells that is protein deoxyribonucleic acid and polysaccharides are all soluble in water. pure water is tasteless odorless and transparent and thus provides a habitat for aquatic plants and organisms because sunlight can reach them within the water. though clean water is a vital commodity for the well being of human but unfortunately the availability of fresh water is unevenly distributed and greatly threatened where available due to problems associated with climate change inefficient water management and pollution. recent report says very high percentage of the world population still lacks water for human well being and ecosystem conservation. the world is faced with the dilemma of achieving balance between economic development and sustainable natural environment. effective wastewater treatment has been earlier identified a way of protecting the water environment with detailed discussion on effective cheap and accessible method of wastewater treatment. various other methods of water purification such as forward and or reverse osmosis precipitations coagulation filtrations modular anaerobic system microbial fuel cell and advanced oxidation process with their attendant challenges have been reported in literature. various environmental policies stipulating discharge protocols exists. these policies are however not effectively executed as the industries consider them as damaging to business. the ability of industries to run with the various environmental discharge policies will sustain our natural environment. policy integration that is factoring environmental issues of concern into the core of economic development is highly important to facilitate policy performance. the main actors in environmental issues that is the industries agro firms and populace show very little understanding of the impact of their activities on the present and future environment. while organized periodical training concerning environmental sustainability should form part of environmental policy objectives ensuring that these objectives are integrated into sectors plains and policies is important. drinking water supplied to our communities is usually sourced from rivers springs and underground sources. usually some form of treatment is carried out to ensure the water is fit for drinking although some sources are somewhat free from contaminating microorganism and can be clean for example deep well. in many developing countries one source of water can serve many uses such as drinking washing swimming bathing etc. in the same vein sewage can be channeled into water bodies. sewage can be defined as used water draining out of homes and industries that contain a wide range of debris chemicals and microorganisms. such water is regarded as potential health hazard to consumers or the users of other sort. a major kind of hazard is the presence of pathogenic organisms in such water. this is why water is usually treated in three phases. the first is to separate large matter in the water source and the second stage focuses on removing more toxic substances and other matter. the tertiary phase involves total purification of water commonly by chemical disinfection. more recently membrane bioreactors are being used and have been found to be very efficient in removing contaminants. these are combinations of communities and high efficiency membranes that are much more effective at removing contaminants. the role of microbes is obvious in the second stage where microorganisms actively carry out biodegradation of organic matter in the aqueous portion produced after the first stage. biodegradation of materials such as paper and petroleum are by bacteria algae and protozoa. when water is exposed to air soil as well as effluents it gains saprobic microorganisms it can also pick up pathogens such as cryptosporidium campylobacter salmonella shigella etc. to monitor water for each of these pathogens may not be possible but detection of fecal contamination is an easier way of spotting contamination. in such case when the fecal contamination is high pathogens are believed to be present and the water is unsafe for drinking. hence indicator organisms are used as tools to detect fecal contamination of water. they usually inhabit the intestine of mammals and birds and can be easily identified using common laboratory procedures. to achieve water protection it will be almost impossible to search for the pathogens themselves. hence certain organisms with specified criteria are used as indicators of the presence of enteric pathogens in a water sample. an indicator bacterium should be applicable for analysis of all types of water it should be found anytime enteric pathogens are present and it should thrive in the wastewater longer than the toughest enteric pathogen. in addition such organism should not reproduce in the contaminated water because this will give exaggerated values and it should not be harmful to human begins. other criteria are that the level of contamination should be directly proportional to the level of fecal contamination assay procedure for the indicator organism should be highly specific and the test procedure should be easily performed. the following are commonly used as indicators of fecal contamination in water total coliforms escherichia coli fecal coliforms fecal streptococci enterococci coliphage and clostridium perfringens. coliforms are members of the family enterobacteriaceae. they are facultative anaerobic gram negative nonsporing rod shaped bacteria that ferment lactose with gas formation within hours at. microbial contamination of water can be detected by checking for certain organisms including heterotrophic bacteria coliforms and escherichia coliin such samples. the work by kora et al. showed that heterotrophic bacteria were in abundance in the lake water sampled. they also reported that contamination by e. coliand coliforms were beyond the allowable limit indiscriminate disposal of sewage into water as well as release of human excreta was implicated in the high level of indicator organisms. control of pathogens in water is important to prevent waterborne diseases this can be effectively done using multiple barrier approach. microbial treatment methods goes further than traditional municipal wastewater treatment because it takes into consideration the removal of nutrients and easily degradable organic compounds as well as the possible presence of toxic compounds and variations in ph of the wastewater. a more advanced design is required in the bioreactor to be used. some parameters to be considered in designing a treatment system are biomass yield nutrient addition the supply of oxygen or other electron donor ph control as well as kinetics that is biological reaction rates. it is important to note at high concentration many compounds of interest are toxic to bacteria being used for treatment. also some dissolved organic and inorganic compounds may constitute inhibitors to biodegradation by the organism. biological treatment processes may not consist of the followinglagoon treatment activated sludge as well as fixed film bioreactors. the lagoon treatment is long detention time basins but unlike activated sludge processes they do not use solid recycle. such treatment scheme may be in three categories anaerobic lagoon treatment which makes use of highly loaded lakes creating anaerobic conditions. it has been used successfully for the pretreatment of meat and poultry processing wastewater reducing the biochemical oxygen demand considerably. in the case of facultative ponds there is an aerobic surface and an anaerobic bottom. the top aerobic layer facilitates treatment of dissolved organic compounds as well as odourous compounds. this has found application in pulp and paper industries. with regards to aerated lagoons oxygen is provided by mechanical means or diffused aeration and the solids are continuously mixed and in suspension. biological oxygen demand removal may range up to. another biological treatment process of interest is the activated sludge. it is made up of an aeration basin where aeration equipment provides both oxygen and adequate mixing of wastewater to maintain a uniformly mixed liquor suspended solids. the aeration basin is followed by a liquidsolid separation usually in a clarifier by gravity and finally the settled biomass is returned again to the activated sludge basin. examples of aeration basin configurations are plug flow systems single completely mixed basins and basins in series. the solid retention time is important in this treatment process. the solid retention time is the average time biomass is maintained in a biological treatment process reaction. generally srt control is temperature dependent and for a warmer climate srt should be between and days. the clarifier is very important in the performance of activated sludge processes. it ensures that efficient clarification and thickening of mixed liquor occurs. when the readily degradable soluble biochemical oxygen demand is high in wastewaters growth of filamentous bacteria is encouraged leading to poor sludge settlement. the use of powdered activated carbon has been discovered to enhance the efficiency of activated sludge processes. the pac functions by adsorbing inhibitory chemicals or adsorbing chemicals that buffer variable loads. the application between and mg liter of wastewater has been proven to remove organic inhibitors of the process as well as improve nitrification since it absorbs organic compounds that can prevent this process in autotrophic bacteria. apart from the aforementioned anaerobic bioreactors are also beneficial for the industrial wastewater treatment. this is because it is cost effective and can be used for industrial wastewater with high strength. the processes in the anaerobic bioreactor lead to the production of mainly methane as well as other gases. however there is a need to strike a balance between fermentation bacterial activity and methanogenic bacteria activity as the latter is slow growing. advantages of anaerobic treatment include low sludge formation production of useful product low nutrient requirement and more importantly less energy requirements since aeration is not necessary. in addition to the energy production advantages of anaerobic wastewater treatment high organic matter removal efficiency low excess sludge production and stable operation are characteristics of this wastewater treatment technique. a most recent advancement in the biological treatment of wastewater is the use of membranes in bioreactors. in such cases the membrane can serve three major purposes. firstly membranes can be used as a surface for the attachment for growth of organisms and to permit oxygen to permeate into the biofilm. an example of this is the hollow fiber gas permeable membranes in wastewater treatment. such membrane is produced from microporous hydrophobic polypropylene and allows almost oxygen transfer while ensuring high biomass density within the space. the second way membranes can be used as selective barriers. such membranes permit organic compounds in wastewater to permeate but do not transport ions into the bioreactor. thus it allows for the selection of biodegradable organic compounds. an example of a material used for such membrane is silicone rubber. finally membranes can be for biomass separation. this third category requires that the membrane be used instead of a clarifier after activated sludge treatment. when such membranes are used the effluent produced is of high quality and less sludge. in addition automated processing can be easily employed. the disadvantage however is the financial enormity of the investment for initial start up as well as maintenance. since coliform bacteria are often detected in drinking water and often the source of contamination is not known it is important to put in place control measures. the water distribution systems must be considered because water quality deterioration may occur. this can be as a result of reduced maintenance of the distribution system or from insufficient treatment and may lead to undue microbial growth which the consumer may not notice. water distribution systems should be periodically flushed to remove sediments deposits as well as the growth of microorganisms within the pipe. for areas where the flow rate is low and possibly of the water becoming stale is high a secondary disinfection using monochloramine and proper maintenance should be carried out in such as to prevent nitrification. another point is to avoid a break in the distribution system especially during construction repairs or installations and cross connections. the officers should also ensure that the level of treatment a water sample is given is in conformity with the quality of the source of water. also the sampling for laboratory analysis must also be taken into consideration and monitored thoroughly when aseptic techniques are compromised detection of coliforms may occur. even though reports of water diseases have been low and less serious in most developed countries it is still a major concern in some underdeveloped countries especially war ravaged countries. it is however important to operate a multibarrier approach which will ensure protection of the water source and also certify adequate treatment and distribution of water. it is however important that every occurrence of coliforms in drinking water be properly investigated so that if the contamination is as a result of operational deficiency this can be addressed and future occurrence is prevented thus safe guarding the health of the public. several modern methods of water purification have been well embraced in our society today. however some rural dwellers who may not be able to afford these modern treatment methods still have water pollution as a major challenge. furthermore the disinfection by products which remain after treatment is another reason why herbal attempts in water treatment should be encouraged. it is important to note that not many researchers apply their antimicrobial extract or fractions directly in water treatment. many groups stop at establishing the antimicrobial potential of their study plant whereas others go further to apply the extracts in water treatment. for instance a reported work used alcoholic aqueous and fresh juice extracts of ocimum sanctum and azadirachta indica and applied them in vitro against salmonella which was chosen as an indicator organism. the alcoholic extract gave the best result for well water whereas the aqueous extract was best for lake water. similarly inspired by the fact that tulsi neem and amla are used to treat microbial infection without any side effect another researcher compared the effectiveness of these three herbs in water purification using percentage of e. coliremoval to measure the effectiveness of each herb. a notable observation is the fact that a mixture of concentration of each herb is not as efficient as the synergistic combination of the three. an indirect application of herbs in water purification is their use in the synthesis of nanoparticles which are afterwards applied to remove contaminants from water. these extracts influence the surface properties of the nanoparticles thus dictating their unique properties owing to the obvious advantages of natural disinfection there is a need for more research into natural products for water purification. this will in no small way help rural dwellers to cheaply assess cheap clean water and so live a healthier lifestyle. all organisms including man need water for their survival. water resource managers had strongly depended on wastewater treatment in ensuring that the quality of water is sustained preserved and maintained for optimal use. by an estimated around billion people out of a total population of around billion will be living in areas of water stress. one of the major environmental issues affecting humanity is the increasing worldwide contamination of freshwater systems as a consequence of industrial and chemical compound materials being emptied into their pathways runways majorly in form of micro pollutants. according to schwarzenbach et al. most of these pollutants are present at low concentrations many of them however can raise significant toxicological concerns more importantly when such compounds are present as constituents of composite blends. numerous micro pollutants had been identified in literatures which are not vulnerable to current treatment and are subsequently transported to the aquatic environment. some of these include steroid hormones pesticides industrial chemicals pharmaceuticals and many other emerging materials. this consequently endangers both the aquatic and human life. it is therefore not surprising that freshwater pollution is a strong public menace which requires global concern. the next quotation properly situates the environmental risk humans are exposed to it is in the interest of all the world that climatic changes are understood and that the risks of irreversible damage to natural systems and the threats to the very survival of man be evaluated and allayed with the greatest urgency the above quotation were the statements of the president of the republic of the maldives his excellency maumoon abdul gayoom during the united nations general assembly held in in the united states of america as adapted from the. the meeting was centered on issues of environment and development. due to climate change effect both the thermal and hydrological phases of rivers are expected to vary. owning to these it is necessary to briefly discuss what climate change is as climate change has the potential of imposing additional pressures in some regions of the world. in other to get a good grasp of what climate change is it may be better to first define climate. climate is usually narrowly defined as the average weather or broadly as the statistical description in terms of the average and variability of relevant parameters or quantities of interest over a period of time ranging from days to millions of years. most often the parameters often used are temperature precipitation wind etc. climate can therefore be generally described as a state including statistical description of the climate system. climate change on the other hand often referred to as global warming is the rise in the average temperature on the earth s surface. it is well believed that the climate change event is as a consequence of human use of fossil fuels which consequently releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the air. these gases trap heat within the earth s atmosphere and can have a variety of effects ranging from rising sea levels to severe weather events. green et al. had submitted that global climate change can include natural and anthropogenic influences on terrestrial climate and the hydrologic cycle. most notable international scientific community had actualized the reality of climate change. some of these include the national aeronautics and space administration the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and the environmental protection agency of the united states to mention a few. these agencies further reiterated that climate change is a menace created from human activity to affect human. figure adapted from world health organization geneva report revealed that all the major activities of global climatic changes eventually bore its consequence on human in general and on human health in particular. inter relationship between various kinds of environmental change. adapted from who geneva report. however pressures and anxiety on the earth s climatic system are having impacts on the surface of the earth. apart from the rising surface temperatures the activities of increasing and frequent flooding and droughts and the changes in our natural water ecosystem are other areas of great concern in the continuous existence of man on earth. according to who geneva report climatic situation and activities affect human well being both directly and indirectly. the direct influence is through the physical effects of climatic extremes whereas the indirect means include the influence on the intensities or level of pollution in the air on the marine and freshwater systems that provide food and water as well as the pathogens that cause infectious diseases. for the purpose of this section we concentrate on the climatic activities with respect to water pollution. this will lead us to the next sub section. observational records and climate projections provide abundant evidence that freshwater resources are vulnerable and have the potential to be strongly impacted by climate change with wide ranging consequences for human societies and ecosystems excerpt from the executive summary of the technical paper of the ipcc edited by bates et al. human activity affects weather climate and the environment. while some of human activities are harmless others damage the environment. while the environment can absorb some abuse without long term effects much harmful human activity exceeds the environment s capacity to recover. water pollution is one of the inevitable human induced climate change issues that called for urgent remedial measures. water pollution will in no small measure affect or alter the basic water quality parameters comprising the micro pollutants physiochemical and biological parameters. probable and incessant changes in both rainfall and air temperature has the capacity to affect river flow thereby inducing chemical reaction kinetics as well as drop in the freshwater ecological quality. associated with such process are dilution of contaminants and water sediment loads which when ran into lakes will alter its natural features and affect its inhabitants. this form of water pollution or through man made toxic chemical or and by products addition may therefore generate some toxic and greenhouse gases which may subsequently contribute to global warming activities or more severe environmental threats. the greenhouse gases are the gaseous constituents of the atmosphere which can absorb and emit radiation at certain wavelengths within the spectrum of thermal infrared radiation emitted by the earth s surface the atmosphere itself and the clouds. the primary greenhouse gases in the earth s atmosphere include carbon dioxide nitrous oxide water vapor methane and ozone. the other ones identified from the kyoto protocol include hydrofluorocarbons perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride. some of these environmental threats include earth s temperature enhancement lowering of atmospheric air quality and killing of aquatic animals. consequently given the legacy of historic greenhouse gas emissions and the prospect of inevitable climate change one can not but commit significant financial and technical resources to remediating the effect through rigorous research efforts and sensitization activities more importantly to water pollution and water related issues. thus water resources managers are continuously and increasingly looking for information on the possible changes in hydrological regimes which may arise in the next few decades for likeable adaptation measure plan. an interesting challenge is that while incessant water pollution may bring about a change in climatic conditions through greenhouse effect and activities the climate too will in turn take its toll effect on the water system and environment. this is because the higher temperature generated from the greenhouse effect will eventually turn some part of the snowfall into rainfall causing an earlier snowmelt season. these effects will consequently alter the timing and volume of spring flood appreciably. the rise in sea level during this time will then cause saline water intrusion into groundwater aquifers close to the coast thereby reducing the available groundwater resources. this process will in no small measure affect humans as almost about of the world population depends on groundwater for their various activities. mitchelle et al. using physically hydrological and water temperature modeling framework had reported an increase in the seasonality of river discharge for about of the global land coverage for the projected and modeled data for years when compared with the years spanning. they also projected a rise in temperaturerevealing a projected global change into the future. other effects of climate change on the hydrological cycle include increasing atmospheric water vapor content changes in soil moisture and runoff and changing precipitation patterns. furthermore higher temperatures of freshwater and changes in extremes including floods and droughts can also intensify many forms of water pollution. the authors also showed that water fluctuation in quantity and quality has the potential of affecting food stability and availabilityleading to a reduction in food security to vulnerable poor farmers. almost of the entire population of the earth do not have adequate access to safe water while about suffer the effects of deplorable sanitary situations. schwarzenbach et al. had submitted that the increase in surface groundwater pollution will go a long way in affecting both the human and aquatic life systems. according to schwarzenbach et al. about of the earth s available and renewable freshwater are used for industrial domestic and agricultural purposes. however if this activities are not well managed water pollution may be inevitable with different kinds of pollutants. some of the water pollutants according to the authors include industrial chemicals biocides natural chemicals industrial products as well as consumer products. industrial manufactured nanomaterials had also been found to be a major water pollutant whose effects is on the increase in affecting aquatic ecosystem. according to lapworth et al. groundwater pollution mainly results from landfill leachate infiltration of contaminated water from agricultural land groundwater surface water reaction as well as seepage of sewer systems. while some of these pollutants like heavy metals are not degraded at all some others disintegrated very slowly and can be transported to hundreds of kilometers away from the source. the effects of their waterborne pollution however ranges from contamination of drinking water causing drinking water quality problems to emission of greenhouse gases resulting in climatic change challenges. some remediate climate change mitigation measures against water pollution can however be taken. some of these include carbon dioxide capture and storage planting of bio energy crops proper solid waste disposition afforestation or reforestation cropland managementboth for water and reduced tillage among other measures. scientific researches involving water pollution should be geared more toward ascertaining the physical underlying molecular mechanisms and factors rather than just the usual empirical comparison approach that is commonly used. the mechanisms involved if well understood will go a long way in properly situating ways of combating the water pollution challenges. this according to metz and ingold may be achieved by developing a structure that addresses both the problem dimension and sustainability dimension of assessing best instruments that regulate water pollution. a sustainable working policy on water pollution should not only be designed and enacted but also rigorously followed more importantly in the developing and underdeveloped countries where the menace of water pollution has not been effectively managed. bemelmans videc had presented a classification for effectively managing water pollution. these are regulation economic instruments and information. these bemelmans videc classifications according to metz would help in differentiating source directed measures from end of pipe measures in water quality regulation. while the source directed measures help in avoiding pollution before toxic and injurious chemical materials enter into waters the end of pipe measures concentrate on filtering pollution after its input into wastewater. furthermore usage and disposal approaches should be in place with the aim of minimizing the addition of critical pollutants into aquatic environment. in addition such system specific properties and reactivities should be well understood and quantified. this kind of processes will yield a significant framework for reliable coverage and evaluation of chemical compounds in complex macroscopic ecosystems. other alternative methods for removing pollutants from waters include ozonation and advanced oxidation process coagulation flocculation membrane bioreactor pac and attached growth treatment processes. refer to the work of for comprehensive reading on the methodology and activity of each process. it can therefore be concluded that whatever form of measure taken in inhibiting both surface and groundwater will not only advance our aquatic ecosystem but will also help man from further endangering his environment from the menace of climate change. since water forms a core of the existence of human and other living things its preservation and sustainable availability can not be overemphasized. the availability of clean water is greatly threatened by various human activities and of interest is pollution which in turn affects the ecosystem and causes various climatic changes. while various wastewater treatment methods are being explored by industries and various treatment plants untreated wastewater is still being discharged into the water bodies by some industries. thus effective environmental protection policies compliance drive will be of immense benefit to the environment and by extension to human. factoring these environmental protection policies into the goals and objectives of various actors involved in environmental deterioration will help policies performance. this will serve as a step forward in the direction of ameliorating water pollution. the author. licensee intechopen. this chapter is distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution. license which permits unrestricted use distribution and reproduction in any medium provided the original work is properly cited. help us write another book on this subject and reach those readerstotal chapter downloadscrossref citationslogin to your personal dashboard for more detailed statistics on your publications. edited by matja glavanby amy y. olsen angela smith and shawn larsonedited by ismail m. m. rahmanby seyed y. s. lisar rouhollah motafakkerazad mosharraf m. hossain and ismail m. m. rahmanwe are intechopen the worlds leading publisher of open access books. built by scientists for scientists. our readership spans scientists professors researchers librarians and students as well as business professionals. we share our knowledge and peer reveiwed research papers with libraries scientific and engineering societies and also work with corporate r d departments and government entities. headquartersintechopen limited princes gate court london sw qj united kingdomphone intechopen. all rights reserved. empty searchwater is a basic resource that guarantees the life of all living beings on the planet. however its scarcity and pollution cause millions of people to have poor access to this much needed asset. although there are water treatment processes such as drinking water treatment or desalination that facilitate its treatment use and consumption in areas with quality or supply problems it is first necessary to avoid its contamination. in this video we show you what are the main causes and effects of water pollution. humans are the main cause of water pollution which is triggered in many ways by the dumping of industrial waste due to temperature rise that cause the alteration of water by reducing the oxygen in its composition or due to deforestation which causes sediments and bacteria to appear under the soil and therefore contaminate groundwater. in the same way the pesticides used in agricultural fields filter through underground channels and reach the consumption networks and also as a result of accidental spillage of oil. what are the main consequences of water pollution firstly the disappearance of biodiversity and aquatic ecosystems. also humans are harmed by the alteration in the food chain and by contracting illnesses when drinking or using contaminated water. as you can see water pollution has a great impact in the environment. for all this we must ensure water availability its sustainable management and sanitation for all as reflected in the sixth of the sustainable development goals adopted by the united nations in the agenda. after reading this article lets see if you really understood what causes pollution in rivers and seas. what pollutes water and what doesn t discard the wrong options related posts... and stay informed with the latest news on innovation. en cumplimiento del reglamento ue de proteccin de datos y dems normativa vigente en materia de proteccin de datos se le informa de que sus datos de carcter personal sern tratados por acciona s. a. con los siguientes datos identificativos nif a direccin avenida de europa parque empresarial de la moraleja de alcobendas tel email protecciondedatos acciona. com con la finalidad de atender sus comentarios y gestionar sus consultas solicitudes reclamaciones o sugerencias as como el envo por medios electrnicos de informacin sobre nuestros servicios y productos a travs del correo electrnico de contacto. la base jurdica para el tratamiento de los datos es el consentimiento del usuario al comunicarse con nosotros. los datos se conservarn mientras se mantenga la relacin y no se solicite su supresin y en cualquier caso nunca durante un plazo superior a doce meses. en caso de que su peticin no sea dirigida a acciona sino a una entidad que forma parte del grupo acciona sta comunicar los datos a la sociedad del grupo que pueda atender su solicitud de servicio o informacin de forma ms eficiente. en este sentido la comunicacin de estos datos puede constituir una transferencia internacional por estar estas empresas ubicadas en pases fuera del territorio de la unin europea para poder atender las necesidades de comunicacin entre las personas que forman parte del grupo a nivel mundial.. la aceptacin de los trminos de la privacidad supone el consentimiento para la transferencia internacional de sus datos necesaria para la correcta tramitacin de su peticin. no estn previstas otras cesiones de datos salvo obligacin legal. el interesado puede ejercitar sus derechos de acceso rectificacin supresin portabilidad y la limitacin u oposicin ante acciona s. a. dirigindose por escrito al departamento de proteccin de datos sita en avenida de europa de alcobendas o mediante el envo de un correo electrnico en la siguiente direccin protecciondedatos acciona. com adjuntando en ambos casos copia del dni u otro documento identificativo. asimismo podr en cualquier momento retirar el consentimiento prestado dirigindose a la direccin arriba indicada as como reclamar ante la autoridad de control. para ms informacin ponemos a su disposicin la poltica de privacidad de la pgina. sustainability is understood as the development that meets the present needs without compromising the capacities of future generations ensuring the balance between economic growth environmental care and social welfare. in sustainability for all we promote the awareness and difussion of good practices that allow to combine economic and social development with the preservation of natural resources. about us you currently have javascript disabled in your web browser please enable javascript to view our website as intended. here are the instructions of how to enable javascript in your browser. figure b. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including water vapour carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide absorb heat energy and emit it in all directions keeping earth s surface and lower atmosphere warm. adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere enhances the effect making earth s surface and lower atmosphere even warmer. image based on a figure from us epa. the sun serves as the primary energy source for earth s climate. some of the incoming sunlight is reflected directly back into space especially by bright surfaces such as ice and clouds and the rest is absorbed by the surface and the atmosphere. much of this absorbed solar energy is re emitted as heat. the atmosphere in turn absorbs and re radiates heat some of which escapes to space. any disturbance to this balance of incoming and outgoing energy will affect the climate. for example small changes in the output of energy from the sun will affect this balance directly. if all heat energy emitted from the surface passed through the atmosphere directly into space earth s average surface temperature would be tens of degrees colder than today. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including water vapour carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide act to make the surface much warmer than this because they absorb and emit heat energy in all directions keeping earth s surface and lower atmosphere warm. without this greenhouse effect life as we know it could not have evolved on our planet. adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere makes it even more effective at preventing heat from escaping into space. when the energy leaving is less than the energy entering earth warms until a new balance is established. greenhouse gases emitted by human activities alter earth s energy balance and thus its climate. humans also affect climate by changing the nature of the land surfaces and through the emission of pollutants that affect the amount and type of particles in the atmosphere. scientists have determined that when all human and natural factors are considered earth s climate balance has been altered towards warming with the biggest contributor being increases in co. figure b. measurements of atmospheric co since from the mauna loa observatory in hawaii and from the south pole show a steady annual increase in atmospheric co concentration. the measurements are made at remote places like these because they are not greatly influenced by local processes so therefore they are representative of the background atmosphere. the small up and down saw tooth pattern reflects seasonal changes in the release and uptake of co by plants. source scripps co program the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide have increased significantly since the industrial revolution began. in the case of carbon dioxide the average concentration measured at the mauna loa observatory in hawaii has risen from parts per million in to more than ppm in. the same rates of increase have since been recorded at numerous other stations worldwide. since preindustrial times the atmospheric concentration of co has increased by over methane has increased by more than and nitrous oxide has increased by roughly. more than half of the increase in co has occurred since. increases in all three gases contribute to warming of earth with the increase in co playing the largest role. see page b to learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. figure b. co variations during the past years obtained from analysis of air trapped in an ice core extracted from antarctica show a sharp rise in atmospheric co starting in the late century. modern atmospheric measurements from mauna loa are superimposed in gray. source figure by eric wolff data from etheridge et al. macfarling meure et al. scripps co program. scientists have examined greenhouse gases in the context of the past. analysis of air trapped inside ice that has been accumulating over time in antarctica shows that the co concentration began to increase significantly in the century after staying in the range of to ppm for the previous years. ice core records extending back years show that during that time co concentrations remained within the range of to ppm throughout many ice age cycles learn about the ice ages and no concentration above ppm is seen in ice core records until the past years. measurements of the forms of carbon in the modern atmosphere show a clear fingerprint of the addition of old carbon coming from the combustion of fossil fuels. in addition it is known that human activities currently emit an estimated billion tonnes of carbon each year mostly by burning fossil fuels which is more than enough to explain the observed increase in concentration. these and other lines of evidence point conclusively to the fact that the elevated co concentration in our atmosphere is the result of human activities. figure b. earth s global average surface temperature has risen as shown in this plot of combined land and ocean measurements from to derived from three independent analyses of the available data sets. the top panel shows annual average values from the three analyses and the bottom panel shows decadal average values including the uncertainty range for the maroon dataset. the temperature changes are relative to the global average surface temperature averaged from. source based on ipcc ar data from the hadcrut dataset noaa climate. gov data from uk met office hadley centre us national aeronautics and space administration goddard institute for space studies and us national oceanic and atmospheric administration national centers for environmental information. estimating global average surface air temperature increase requires careful analysis of millions of measurements from around the world including from land stations ships and satellites. despite the many complications of synthesising such data multiple independent teams have concluded separately and unanimously that global average surface air temperature has risen by about c since. although the record shows several pauses and accelerations in the increasing trend each of the last four decades has been warmer than any other decade in the instrumental record since. going further back in time before accurate thermometers were widely available temperatures can be reconstructed using climate sensitive indicators proxies in materials such as tree rings ice cores and marine sediments. comparisons of the thermometer record with these proxy measurements suggest that the time since the early s has been the warmest year period in at least eight centuries and that global temperature is rising towards peak temperatures last seen to years ago in the warmest part of our current interglacial period. many other impacts associated with the warming trend have become evident in recent years. arctic summer sea ice cover has shrunk dramatically. the heat content of the ocean has increased. global average sea level has risen by approximately cm since due both to the expansion of warmer ocean water and to the addition of melt waters from glaciers and ice sheets on land. warming and precipitation changes are altering the geographical ranges of many plant and animal species and the timing of their life cycles. in addition to the effects on climate some of the excess co in the atmosphere is being taken up by the ocean changing its chemical composition. based just on the physics of the amount of energy that co absorbs and emits a doubling of atmospheric co concentration from pre industrial levels would by itself cause a global average temperature increase of about c. in the overall climate system however things are more complex warming leads to further effects that either amplify or diminish the initial warming. the most important feedbacks involve various forms of water. a warmer atmosphere generally contains more water vapour. water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas thus causing more warming its short lifetime in the atmosphere keeps its increase largely in step with warming. thus water vapour is treated as an amplifier and not a driver of climate change. higher temperatures in the polar regions melt sea ice and reduce seasonal snow cover exposing a darker ocean and land surface that can absorb more heat causing further warming. another important but uncertain feedback concerns changes in clouds. warming and increases in water vapour together may cause cloud cover to increase or decrease which can either amplify or dampen temperature change depending on the changes in the horizontal extent altitude and properties of clouds. the latest assessment of the science indicates that the overall net global effect of cloud changes is likely to be to amplify warming. the ocean moderates climate change. the ocean is a huge heat reservoir but it is difficult to heat its full depth because warm water tends to stay near the surface. the rate at which heat is transferred to the deep ocean is therefore slow it varies from year to year and from decade to decade and it helps to determine the pace of warming at the surface. observations of the sub surface ocean are limited prior to about but since then warming of the upper m is readily apparent and deeper warming is also clearly observed since about. surface temperatures and rainfall in most regions vary greatly from the global average because of geographical location in particular latitude and continental position. both the average values of temperature rainfall and their extremes are also strongly affected by local patterns of winds. estimating the effects of feedback processes the pace of the warming and regional climate change requires the use of mathematical models of the atmosphere ocean land and ice built upon established laws of physics and the latest understanding of the physical chemical and biological processes affecting climate and run on powerful computers. models vary in their projections of how much additional warming to expect but all such models agree that the overall net effect of feedbacks is to amplify warming. rigorous analysis of all data and lines of evidence shows that most of the observed global warming over the past years or so can not be explained by natural causes and instead requires a significant role for the influence of human activities. in order to discern the human influence on climate scientists must consider many natural variations that affect temperature precipitation and other aspects of climate from local to global scale on timescales from days to decades and longer. one natural variation is the el nio southern oscillation an irregular alternation between warming and cooling in the equatorial pacific ocean that causes significant year to year regional and global shifts in temperature and rainfall patterns. volcanic eruptions also alter climate in part increasing the amount of small particles in the stratosphere that reflect or absorb sunlight leading to a short term surface cooling lasting typically about two to three years. over hundreds of thousands of years slow recurring variations in earth s orbit around the sun which alter the distribution of solar energy received by earth have been enough to trigger the ice age cycles of the past years. fingerprinting is a powerful way of studying the causes of climate change. different influences on climate lead to different patterns seen in climate records. this becomes obvious when scientists probe beyond changes in the average temperature of the planet and look more closely at geographical and temporal patterns of climate change. for example an increase in the sun s energy output will lead to a very different pattern of temperature change compared to that induced by an increase in co concentration. observed atmospheric temperature changes show a fingerprint much closer to that of a long term co increase than to that of a fluctuating sun alone. scientists routinely test whether purely natural changes in the sun volcanic activity or internal climate variability could plausibly explain the patterns of change they have observed in many different aspects of the climate system. these analyses have shown that the observed climate changes of the past several decades can not be explained just by natural factors. figure b. the amount and rate of warming expected for the century depends on the total amount of greenhouse gases that humankind emits. models project the temperature increase for a business as usual emissions scenario and aggressive emission reductions falling close to zero years from now. black is the modelled estimate of past warming. each solid line represents the average of different model runs using the same emissions scenario and the shaded areas provide a measure of the spread between the temperature changes projected by the different models. all data are relative to a reference period of. source based on ipcc ar scientists have made major advances in the observations theory and modelling of earth s climate system and these advances have enabled them to project future climate change with increasing confidence. nevertheless several major issues make it impossible to give precise estimates of how global or regional temperature trends will evolve decade by decade into the future. firstly we can not predict how much co human activities will emit as this depends on factors such as how the global economy develops and how society s production and consumption of energy changes in the coming decades. secondly with current understanding of the complexities of how climate feedbacks operate there is a range of possible outcomes even for a particular scenario of co emissions. finally over timescales of a decade or so natural variability can modulate the effects of an underlying trend in temperature. taken together all model projections indicate that earth will continue to warm considerably more over the next few decades to centuries. if there were no technological or policy changes to reduce emission trends from their current trajectory then further globally averaged warming of. to. c in addition to that which has already occurred would be expected during the century. projecting what those ranges will mean for the climate experienced at any particular location is a challenging scientific problem but estimates are continuing to improve as regional and local scale models advance. share national geographic headquarters street nw washington dc careers newsroom privacy notice sustainability policy terms of service code of ethics contact usnational geographic society is a organization. national geographic society. all rights reserved. pollution is the introduction of harmful materials into the environment. these harmful materials are called pollutants. grades subjectsbiology ecology health earth science geographycontents imagespollution is the introduction of harmful materials into the environment. these harmful materials are called pollutants. pollutants can be natural such as volcanic ash. they can also be created by human activity such as trash or runoff produced by factories. pollutants damage the quality of air water and land. many things that are useful to people produce pollution. cars spew pollutants from their exhaust pipes. burning coal to create electricity pollutes the air. industries and homes generate garbage and sewage that can pollute the land and water. pesticideschemical poisons used to kill weeds and insectsseep into waterways and harm wildlife. all living thingsfrom one celled microbes to blue whalesdepend on earth s supply of air and water. when these resources are polluted all forms of life are threatened. pollution is a global problem. although urban areas are usually more polluted than the countryside pollution can spread to remote places where no people live. for example pesticides and other chemicals have been found in the antarctic ice sheet. in the middle of the northern pacific ocean a huge collection of microscopic plastic particles forms what is known as the great pacific garbage patch. air and water currents carry pollution. ocean currents and migrating fish carry marine pollutants far and wide. winds can pick up radioactive material accidentally released from a nuclear reactor and scatter it around the world. smoke from a factory in one country drifts into another country. in the past visitors to big bend national park in the u. s. state of texas could see kilometers across the vast landscape. now coal burning power plants in texas and the neighboring state of chihuahua mexico have spewed so much pollution into the air that visitors to big bend can sometimes see only kilometers. the three major types of pollution are air pollution water pollution and land pollution. air pollutionsometimes air pollution is visible. a person can see dark smoke pour from the exhaust pipes of large trucks or factories for example. more often however air pollution is invisible. polluted air can be dangerous even if the pollutants are invisible. it can make people s eyes burn and make them have difficulty breathing. it can also increase the risk of lung cancer. sometimes air pollution kills quickly. in an accident at a pesticide plant in bhopal india released a deadly gas into the air. at least people died within days. hundreds of thousands more were permanently injured. natural disasters can also cause air pollution to increase quickly. when volcanoes erupt they eject volcanic ash and gases into the atmosphere. volcanic ash can discolor the sky for months. after the eruption of the indonesian volcano of krakatoa in ash darkened the sky around the world. the dimmer sky caused fewer crops to be harvested as far away as europe and north america. for years meteorologists tracked what was known as the equatorial smoke stream. in fact this smoke stream was a jet stream a wind high in earth s atmosphere that krakatoa s air pollution made visible. volcanic gases such as sulfur dioxide can kill nearby residents and make the soil infertile for years. mount vesuvius a volcano in italy famously erupted in killing hundreds of residents of the nearby towns of pompeii and herculaneum. most victims of vesuvius were not killed by lava or landslides caused by the eruption. they were choked or asphyxiated by deadly volcanic gases. in a toxic cloud developed over lake nyos cameroon. lake nyos sits in the crater of a volcano. though the volcano did not erupt it did eject volcanic gases into the lake. the heated gases passed through the water of the lake and collected as a cloud that descended the slopes of the volcano and into nearby valleys. as the toxic cloud moved across the landscape it killed birds and other organisms in their natural habitat. this air pollution also killed thousands of cattle and as many as people. most air pollution is not natural however. it comes from burning fossil fuelscoal oil and natural gas. when gasoline is burned to power cars and trucks it produces carbon monoxide a colorless odorless gas. the gas is harmful in high concentrations or amounts. city traffic produces highly concentrated carbon monoxide. cars and factories produce other common pollutants including nitrogen oxide sulfur dioxide and hydrocarbons. these chemicals react with sunlight to produce smog a thick fog or haze of air pollution. the smog is so thick in linfen china that people can seldom see the sun. smog can be brown or grayish blue depending on which pollutants are in it. smog makes breathing difficult especially for children and older adults. some cities that suffer from extreme smog issue air pollution warnings. the government of hong kong for example will warn people not to go outside or engage in strenuous physical activity when smog is very thick. when air pollutants such as nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide mix with moisture they change into acids. they then fall back to earth as acid rain. wind often carries acid rain far from the pollution source. pollutants produced by factories and power plants in spain can fall as acid rain in norway. acid rain can kill all the trees in a forest. it can also devastate lakes streams and other waterways. when lakes become acidic fish can t survive. in sweden acid rain created thousands of dead lakes where fish no longer live. acid rain also wears away marble and other kinds of stone. it has erased the words on gravestones and damaged many historic buildings and monuments. the taj mahal in agra india was once gleaming white. years of exposure to acid rain has left it pale. governments have tried to prevent acid rain by limiting the amount of pollutants released into the air. in europe and north america they have had some success but acid rain remains a major problem in the developing world especially asia. greenhouse gases are another source of air pollution. greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane occur naturally in the atmosphere. in fact they are necessary for life on earth. they absorb sunlight reflected from earth preventing it from escaping into space. by trapping heat in the atmosphere they keep earth warm enough for people to live. this is called the greenhouse effect. but human activities such as burning fossil fuels and destroying forests have increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. this has increased the greenhouse effect and average temperatures across the globe are rising. the decade that began in the year was the warmest on record. this increase in worldwide average temperatures caused in part by human activity is called global warming. global warming is causing ice sheets and glaciers to melt. the melting ice is causing sea levels to rise at a rate of millimeters per year. the rising seas will eventually flood low lying coastal regions. entire nations such as the islands of maldives are threatened by this climate change. global warming also contributes to the phenomenon of ocean acidification. ocean acidification is the process of ocean waters absorbing more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. fewer organisms can survive in warmer less salty waters. the ocean food web is threatened as plants and animals such as coral fail to adapt to more acidic oceans. scientists have predicted that global warming will cause an increase in severe storms. it will also cause more droughts in some regions and more flooding in others. the change in average temperatures is already shrinking some habitats the regions where plants and animals naturally live. polar bears hunt seals from sea ice in the arctic. the melting ice is forcing polar bears to travel farther to find food and their numbers are shrinking. people and governments can respond quickly and effectively to reduce air pollution. chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons are a dangerous form of air pollution that governments worked to reduce in the s and s. cfcs are found in gases that cool refrigerators in foam products and in aerosol cans. cfcs damage the ozone layer a region in earth s upper atmosphere. the ozone layer protects earth by absorbing much of the sun s harmful ultraviolet radiation. when people are exposed to more ultraviolet radiation they are more likely to develop skin cancer eye diseases and other illnesses. in the s scientists noticed that the ozone layer over antarctica was thinning. this is often called the ozone hole. no one lives permanently in antarctica. but australia the home of more than million people lies at the edge of the hole. in the s the australian government began an effort to warn people of the dangers of too much sun. many countries including the united states now severely limit the production of cfcs. water pollutionsome polluted water looks muddy smells bad and has garbage floating in it. some polluted water looks clean but is filled with harmful chemicals you can t see or smell. polluted water is unsafe for drinking and swimming. some people who drink polluted water are exposed to hazardous chemicals that may make them sick years later. others consume bacteria and other tiny aquatic organisms that cause disease. the united nations estimates that children die every day from drinking dirty water. sometimes polluted water harms people indirectly. they get sick because the fish that live in polluted water are unsafe to eat. they have too many pollutants in their flesh. there are some natural sources of water pollution. oil and natural gas for example can leak into oceans and lakes from natural underground sources. these sites are called petroleum seeps. the world s largest petroleum seep is the coal oil point seep off the coast of the u. s. state of california. the coal oil point seep releases so much oil that tar balls wash up on nearby beaches. tar balls are small sticky pieces of pollution that eventually decompose in the ocean. human activity also contributes to water pollution. chemicals and oils from factories are sometimes dumped or seep into waterways. these chemicals are called runoff. chemicals in runoff can create a toxic environment for aquatic life. runoff can also help create a fertile environment for cyanobacteria also called blue green algae. cyanobacteria reproduce rapidly creating a harmful algal bloom. harmful algal blooms prevent organisms such as plants and fish from living in the ocean. they are associated with dead zones in the world s lakes and rivers places where little life exists below surface water. mining and drilling can also contribute to water pollution. acid mine drainage is a major contributor to pollution of rivers and streams near coal mines. acid helps miners remove coal from the surrounding rocks. the acid is washed into streams and rivers where it reacts with rocks and sand. it releases chemical sulfur from the rocks and sand creating a river rich in sulfuric acid. sulfuric acid is toxic to plants fish and other aquatic organisms. sulfuric acid is also toxic to people making rivers polluted by amd dangerous sources of water for drinking and hygiene. oil spills are another source of water pollution. in april the deepwater horizon oil rig exploded in the gulf of mexico causing oil to gush from the ocean floor. in the following months hundreds of millions of gallons of oil spewed into the gulf waters. the spill produced large plumes of oil under the sea and an oil slick on the surface as large as square kilometers. the oil slick coated wetlands in the u. s. states of louisiana and mississippi killing marsh plants and aquatic organisms such as crabs and fish. birds such as pelicans became coated in oil and were unable to fly or access food. more than million animals died as a result of the deepwater horizon oil spill. buried chemical waste can also pollute water supplies. for many years people disposed of chemical wastes carelessly not realizing its dangers. in the s people living in the love canal area in niagara falls new york suffered from extremely high rates of cancer and birth defects. it was discovered that a chemical waste dump had poisoned the area s water. in families living in love canal had to abandon their homes. if not disposed of properly radioactive waste from nuclear power plants can escape into the environment. radioactive waste can harm living things and pollute the water. sewage that has not been properly treated is a common source of water pollution. many cities around the world have poor sewage systems and sewage treatment plants. delhi the capital of india is home to more than million people. more than half the sewage and other waste produced in the city are dumped into the yamuna river. this pollution makes the river dangerous to use as a source of water for drinking or hygiene. it also reduces the river s fishery resulting in less food for the local community. a major source of water pollution is fertilizer used in agriculture. fertilizer is material added to soil to make plants grow larger and faster. fertilizers usually contain large amounts of the elements nitrogen and phosphorus which help plants grow. rainwater washes fertilizer into streams and lakes. there the nitrogen and phosphorus cause cyanobacteria to form harmful algal blooms. rain washes other pollutants into streams and lakes. it picks up animal waste from cattle ranches. cars drip oil onto the street and rain carries it into storm drains which lead to waterways such as rivers and seas. rain sometimes washes chemical pesticides off of plants and into streams. pesticides can also seep into groundwater the water beneath the surface of the earth. heat can pollute water. power plants for example produce a huge amount of heat. power plants are often located on rivers so they can use the water as a coolant. cool water circulates through the plant absorbing heat. the heated water is then returned to the river. aquatic creatures are sensitive to changes in temperature. some fish for example can only live in cold water. warmer river temperatures prevent fish eggs from hatching. warmer river water also contributes to harmful algal blooms. another type of water pollution is simple garbage. the citarum river in indonesia for example has so much garbage floating in it that you can not see the water. floating trash makes the river difficult to fish in. aquatic animals such as fish and turtles mistake trash such as plastic bags for food. plastic bags and twine can kill many ocean creatures. chemical pollutants in trash can also pollute the water making it toxic for fish and people who use the river as a source of drinking water. the fish that are caught in a polluted river often have high levels of chemical toxins in their flesh. people absorb these toxins as they eat the fish. garbage also fouls the ocean. many plastic bottles and other pieces of trash are thrown overboard from boats. the wind blows trash out to sea. ocean currents carry plastics and other floating trash to certain places on the globe where it can not escape. the largest of these areas called the great pacific garbage patch is in a remote part of the pacific ocean. according to some estimates this garbage patch is the size of texas. the trash is a threat to fish and seabirds which mistake the plastic for food. many of the plastics are covered with chemical pollutants. land pollutionmany of the same pollutants that foul the water also harm the land. mining sometimes leaves the soil contaminated with dangerous chemicals. pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural fields are blown by the wind. they can harm plants animals and sometimes people. some fruits and vegetables absorb the pesticides that help them grow. when people consume the fruits and vegetables the pesticides enter their bodies. some pesticides can cause cancer and other diseases. a pesticide called ddt was once commonly used to kill insects especially mosquitoes. in many parts of the world mosquitoes carry a disease called malaria which kills a million people every year. swiss chemist paul hermann muller was awarded the nobel prize for his understanding of how ddt can control insects and other pests. ddt is responsible for reducing malaria in places such as taiwan and sri lanka. in american biologist rachel carson wrote a book called silent spring which discussed the dangers of ddt. she argued that it could contribute to cancer in humans. she also explained how it was destroying bird eggs which caused the number of bald eagles brown pelicans and ospreys to drop. in the united states banned the use of ddt. many other countries also banned it. but ddt didn t disappear entirely. today many governments support the use of ddt because it remains the most effective way to combat malaria. trash is another form of land pollution. around the world paper cans glass jars plastic products and junked cars and appliances mar the landscape. litter makes it difficult for plants and other producers in the food web to create nutrients. animals can die if they mistakenly eat plastic. garbage often contains dangerous pollutants such as oils chemicals and ink. these pollutants can leech into the soil and harm plants animals and people. inefficient garbage collection systems contribute to land pollution. often the garbage is picked up and brought to a dump or landfill. garbage is buried in landfills. sometimes communities produce so much garbage that their landfills are filling up. they are running out of places to dump their trash. a massive landfill near quezon city philippines was the site of a land pollution tragedy in. hundreds of people lived on the slopes of the quezon city landfill. these people made their living from recycling and selling items found in the landfill. however the landfill was not secure. heavy rains caused a trash landslide killing people. sometimes landfills are not completely sealed off from the land around them. pollutants from the landfill leak into the earth in which they are buried. plants that grow in the earth may be contaminated and the herbivores that eat the plants also become contaminated. so do the predators that consume the herbivores. this process where a chemical builds up in each level of the food web is called bioaccumulation. pollutants leaked from landfills also leak into local groundwater supplies. there the aquatic food web can suffer from bioaccumulation of toxic chemicals. some communities do not have adequate garbage collection systems and trash lines the side of roads. in other places garbage washes up on beaches. kamilo beach in the u. s. state of hawaii is littered with plastic bags and bottles carried in by the tide. the trash is dangerous to ocean life and reduces economic activity in the area. tourism is hawaii s largest industry. polluted beaches discourage tourists from investing in the area s hotels restaurants and recreational activities. some cities incinerate or burn their garbage. incinerating trash gets rid of it but it can release dangerous heavy metals and chemicals into the air. so while trash incinerators can help with the problem of land pollution they sometimes add to the problem of air pollution. reducing pollutionaround the world people and governments are making efforts to combat pollution. recycling for instance is becoming more common. in recycling trash is processed so its useful materials can be used again. glass aluminum cans and many types of plastic can be melted and reused. paper can be broken down and turned into new paper. recycling reduces the amount of garbage that ends up in landfills incinerators and waterways. austria and switzerland have the highest recycling rates. these nations recycle between and percent of their garbage. the united states recycles about percent of its garbage. governments can combat pollution by passing laws that limit the amount and types of chemicals factories and agribusinesses are allowed to use. the smoke from coal burning power plants can be filtered. people and businesses that illegally dump pollutants into the land water and air can be fined for millions of dollars. some government programs such as the superfund program in the united states can force polluters to clean up the sites they polluted. international agreements can also reduce pollution. the kyoto protocol a united nations agreement to limit the emission of greenhouse gases has been signed by countries. the united states the world s second largest producer of greenhouse gases did not sign the agreement. other countries such as china the world s largest producer of greenhouse gases have not met their goals. still many gains have been made. in the cuyahoga river in the u. s. state of ohio was so clogged with oil and trash that it caught on fire. the fire helped spur the clean water act of. this law limited what pollutants could be released into water and set standards for how clean water should be. today the cuyahoga river is much cleaner. fish have returned to regions of the river where they once could not survive. but even as some rivers are becoming cleaner others are becoming more polluted. as countries around the world become wealthier some forms of pollution increase. countries with growing economies usually need more power plants which produce more pollutants. reducing pollution requires environmental political and economic leadership. developed nations must work to reduce and recycle their materials while developing nations must work to strengthen their economies without destroying the environment. developed and developing countries must work together toward the common goal of protecting the environment for future use. photograph by dennis finleylight pollutionlight pollution is the excess amount of light in the night sky. light pollution also called photopollution is almost always found in urban areas. light pollution can disrupt ecosystems by confusing the distinction between night and day. nocturnal animals those that are active at night may venture out during the day while diurnal animals which are active during daylight hours may remain active well into the night. feeding and sleep patterns may be confused. light pollution also indicates an excess use of energy. the dark sky movement is a campaign by people to reduce light pollution. this would reduce energy use allow ecosystems to function more normally and allow scientists and stargazers to observe the atmosphere. noise pollutionnoise pollution is the constant presence of loud disruptive noises in an area. usually noise pollution is caused by construction or nearby transportation facilities such as airports. noise pollution is unpleasant and can be dangerous. some songbirds such as robins are unable to communicate or find food in the presence of heavy noise pollution. the sound waves produced by some noise pollutants can disrupt the sonar used by marine animals to communicate or locate food. how long does it last different materials decompose at different rates. how long does it take for these common types of trash to break down indoor air pollutionthe air inside your house can be polluted. air and carpet cleaners insect sprays and cigarettes are all sources of indoor air pollution. to soak up. chemical compound that reacts with a base to form a salt. acids can corrode some natural materials. acids have ph levels lower than. flow of acid or acidic liquid from metal mines or coal mines. precipitation with high levels of nitric and sulfuric acids. acid rain can be manmade or occur naturally. to adjust to new surroundings or a new situation. suitable or good enough. container of liquid material under high pressure. when released through a small opening the liquid becomes a spray or foam. the strategy of applying profit making practices to the operation of farms and ranches. the art and science of cultivating land for growing crops or raising livestock. harmful chemicals in the atmosphere. diverse group of aquatic organisms the largest of which are seaweeds. silvery reflective metallic element with the symbol al. region at earths extreme south encompassed by the antarctic circle. having to do with water. to choke or suffocate. layers of gases surrounding a planet or other celestial body. single celled organisms found in every ecosystem on earth. to prohibit or not allow. narrow strip of land that lies along a body of water. process by which chemicals are absorbed by an organism either from exposure to a substance with the chemical or by consumption of food containing the chemical. scientist who studies living organisms. physical disorder present at birth and not developed later. type of aquatic bacteria that can photosynthesize light to create energy. also called cyanobacteria and pond scum. growth of abnormal cells in the body. city where a regions government is located. greenhouse gas produced by animals during respiration and used by plants during photosynthesis. carbon dioxide is also the byproduct of burning fossil fuels. colorless odorless and tasteless gas that is slightly less dense than air. it can be toxic to humans. cows and oxen. chemical compound mostly used in refrigerants and flame retardants. some cfcs have destructive effects on the ozone layer. to move around often in a pattern. federal law protecting water from pollution. gradual changes in all the interconnected weather elements on our planet. visible mass of tiny water droplets or ice crystals in earths atmosphere. dark solid fossil fuel mined from the earth. place in the pacific ocean off the coast of the u. s. state of california that naturally emits gases such as methane a seep field. edge of land along the sea or other large body of water. to fight. measure of the amount of a substance or grouping in a specific place. to use up. to poison or make hazardous. substance usually a liquid or gas that reduces the temperature of a system or piece of machinery. tiny ocean animal some of which secrete calcium carbonate to form reefs. bowl shaped depression formed by a volcanic eruption or impact of a meteorite. agricultural produce. steady predictable flow of fluid within a larger body of that fluid. type of aquatic bacteria that can photosynthesize light to create energy. also called blue green algae and pond scum. toxic chemical used as an insecticide but illegal for most uses in the u. s. since. body of water where fish or other aquatic organisms no longer live beneath the surface due to natural or manmade pollution. area of low oxygen in a body of water. years. to decay or break down. oil rig in the gulf of mexico that exploded in. to go from a higher to a lower place. to destroy. nations with low per capita income little infrastructure and a small middle class. to disapprove or encourage someone not to do something. to throw away or get rid of. dull or boring. to make a hole using a rotating digging tool. period of greatly reduced precipitation. our planet the third from the sun. the earth is the only place in the known universe that supports life. having to do with money. to get rid of or throw out. set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and flow of electric charge. conditions that surround and influence an organism or community. to explode or suddenly eject material. gases and particles expelled from an engine. to eject or force out. one or more buildings used for the manufacture of a product. nutrient rich chemical substance applied to soil to encourage plant growth. to punish usually by charging an economic penalty or fee. or the penalty or fee itself. industry or occupation of harvesting fish either in the wild or through aquaculture. overflow of a body of water onto land. clouds at ground level. material usually of plant or animal origin that living organisms use to obtain nutrients. all related food chains in an ecosystem. also called a food cycle. ecosystem filled with trees and underbrush. coal oil or natural gas. fossil fuels formed from the remains of ancient plants and animals. liquid mixture made from oil and used to run many motor vehicles. to create or begin. mass of ice that moves slowly over land. to shine brightly. increase in the average temperature of the earths air and oceans. system or order of a nation state or other political unit. stone marking a persons burial place often engraved with the persons name and dates of birth and death. area of the north pacific ocean where currents have trapped huge amounts of debris mostly plastics. phenomenon where gases allow sunlight to enter earths atmosphere but make it difficult for heat to escape. gas in the atmosphere such as carbon dioxide methane water vapor and ozone that absorbs solar heat reflected by the surface of the earth warming the atmosphere. water found in an aquifer. environment where an organism lives throughout the year or for shorter periods of time. damaging. rapid growth of algae bacteria or other plankton that can threaten an aquatic environment by reducing the amount of oxygen in the water blocking sunlight or releasing toxic chemicals. the gathering and collection of crops including both plants and animals. danger or risk. group of solid and liquid particles in the air that makes it difficult to see. chemical substance with a specific gravity of at least.. organism that eats mainly plants and other producers. chemical compound made entirely of the elements hydrogen and carbon. science and methods of keeping clean and healthy. thick layer of glacial ice that covers a large area of land. to burn up entirely. activity that produces goods and services. not able to perform a task well. unproductive or barren. dark liquid used for printing or artwork. to contribute time or money. unable to be seen. body of land surrounded by water. to distribute give away or sell. winds speeding through the upper atmosphere. island in indonesia site of major volcanic eruption in. also called krakatau. international agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. body of water surrounded by land. site where garbage is layered with dirt and other absorbing material to prevent contamination of the surrounding land or water. introduction of harmful materials into the surface environment. the geographic features of a region. the fall of rocks soil and other materials from a mountain hill or slope. molten rock or magma that erupts from volcanoes or fissures in the earths surface. public rule. carnivorous or bloodsucking worm. new york town and the site of a former toxic waste dump. organ in an animal that is necessary for breathing. infectious disease caused by a parasite carried by mosquitoes. to spoil or damage. type of metamorphic rock. having to do with the ocean. wetland area usually covered by a shallow layer of seawater or freshwater. very large or heavy. person who studies patterns and changes in earths atmosphere. chemical compound that is the basic ingredient of natural gas. tiny organism usually a bacterium. very small. to extract minerals from the earth. process of extracting ore from the earth. large structure representing an event idea or person. political unit made of people who share a common territory. an event occurring naturally that has large scale effects on the environment and people such as a volcano earthquake or hurricane. type of fossil fuel made up mostly of the gas methane. chemical element with the symbol n whose gas form is of the earths atmosphere. one of many chemical compounds made of different combinations of nitrogen and oxygen. one of five awards established by the swedish businessman alfred nobel in. nobel prizes are awarded in physics chemistry medicine literature and peace. substance an organism needs for energy growth and life. decrease in the oceans ph levels caused primarily by increased carbon dioxide. ocean acidification threatens corals and shellfish. fossil fuel formed from the remains of marine plants and animals. also known as petroleum or crude oil. complex series of machinery and systems used to drill for oil on land. smooth dark coating on the surface of a body of water caused by an oil spill or leak. accidental release of petroleum products into a body of water either by an oil tanker or an offshore oil rig. circular pattern usually located near the antarctic of thin atmospheric ozone which absorbs harmful ultraviolet sunlight. layer in the atmosphere containing the gas ozone which absorbs most of the suns ultraviolet radiation. small piece of material. swiss chemist and businessman. large marine bird with a big bill. constant or lasting forever. natural or manufactured substance used to kill organisms that threaten agriculture or are undesirable. pesticides can be fungicides insecticides herbicides or rodenticides fossil fuel formed from the remains of ancient organisms. also called crude oil. place where oil or natural gas from the earths interior leaks to the surface naturally. an unusual act or occurrence. chemical element with the symbol p. chemical material that can be easily shaped when heated to a high temperature. single upward flow of a fluid such as water or smoke. substance that harms health. chemical or other substance that harms a natural resource. introduction of harmful materials into the environment. industrial facility for the generation of electric energy. animal that hunts other animals for food. american biologist and author. having unstable atomic nuclei and emitting subatomic particles and radiation. liquid precipitation. to clean or process in order to make suitable for reuse. to lower or lessen. any area on earth with one or more common characteristics. regions are the basic units of geography. distant or far away. available supply of materials goods or services. resources can be natural or human. to use again. natural substance composed of solid mineral matter. overflow of fluid from a farm or industrial factory. small loose grains of disintegrated rocks. frozen ocean water. base level for measuring elevations. sea level is determined by measurements taken over a year cycle. to slowly flow through a border. not very often. liquid and solid waste material from homes and businesses. process of removing harmful pollutants and contaminants from water discarded by homes and businesses so the water is safe for most uses. nonfiction book by rachel carson that documented the consequences of a polluted environment especially the use of the pesticide ddt. type of air pollution common in manufacturing areas or areas with high traffic. gases given off by a burning substance. top layer of the earths surface where plants can grow. to eject or discharge violently. piece of rock. severe weather indicating a disturbed state of the atmosphere resulting from uplifted air. system to empty streets of excess rainwater. storm drains flow into local creeks rivers or seas. body of flowing water. energetic or requiring a lot of activity. chemical element with the symbol s. greenhouse gas that can cause acid rain. toxic chemical made of hydrogen sulfur and oxygen. federal program to clean up hazardous waste sites in the u. s. also called the comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act. to live. large white mausoleum complex in agra india built by shah jahan for his wife mumtaz. small sticky piece of tar emitted by a natural or manmade oil spill that floats in the ocean and often washes up on beaches. degree of hotness or coldness measured by a thermometer with a numerical scale. rise and fall of the oceans waters caused by the gravitational pull of the moon and sun. the industry of traveling for pleasure. poisonous. movement of many things often vehicles in a specific area. type of large plant with a thick trunk and branches. strong thread made from at least two strings twisted together often made of plastic. powerful light waves that are too short for humans to see but can penetrate earths atmosphere. ultraviolet is often shortened to uv. international organization that works for peace security and cooperation. developed densely populated area where most inhabitants have nonagricultural jobs. depression in the earth between hills. huge and spread out. able to be seen. fragments of lava less than millimeters across. gas such as water vapor or carbon dioxide that is released into the atmosphere by a volcano. an opening in the earths crust through which lava ash and gases erupt and also the cone built by eruptions. introduction of harmful materials into a body of water. body of water that serves as a route for transportation. area of land covered by shallow water or saturated by water. organisms living in a natural environment. movement of air caused by the uneven heating of the earth by the sun. imagesinteractiveswebsitesthe audio illustrations photos and videos are credited beneath the media asset except for promotional images which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. the rights holder for media is the person or group credited. diane boudreau melissa mcdaniel erin sprout andrew turgeon mary crooks national geographic society tim gunther illustrator jeannie evers emdash editing kara west nancy wynne caryl sue national geographic society dunn margery g... exploring your world the adventure of geography. washington d. c. national geographic society. aug. for information on user permissions please read our terms of service. if you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation please contact your teacher. they will best know the preferred format. when you reach out to them you will need the page title url and the date you accessed the resource. if a media asset is downloadable a download button appears in the corner of the media viewer. if no button appears you can not download or save the media. text on this page is printable and can be used according to our terms of service. any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. you can not download interactives. in the united nations general assembly adopted sustainable development goals designed to transform our world by. the sixth goal is to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. according to the united nations one in three people live without sanitation. a lack of sanitation and sanitary waste management systems can reduce a communitys access to clean water and lack of access to clean water can allow diseases to run rampant sometimes creating epidemics of water borne infectious agents. learning about how freshwater systems work in the wilderness rural communities and urban centers can help us better understand the challenges of providing clean water and sanitation to people around the world. humans impact the physical environment in many ways overpopulation pollution burning fossil fuels and deforestation. changes like these have triggered climate change soil erosion poor air quality and undrinkable water. these negative impacts can affect human behavior and can prompt mass migrations or battles over clean water. help your students understand the impact humans have on the physical environment with these classroom resources. plastic is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. some plastics we can reuse or recycleand many play important roles in areas like medicine and public safetybut other items such as straws are designed for only one use. in fact more than percent of plastic is used only once before it is thrown away where it lingers in the environment for a long long time. it often breaks down into smaller and smaller particles called microplastics which can be ingested by both animals and people. fortunately there are things we can do to helplike stop using plastic bags straws and bottles recycling when we can and disposing of waste properly. use these classroom resources to teach about ocean plastics and check back for more coming later this year for the purposes of regulation the united states environmental protection agency identifies two broad categories of pollution point source pollution and nonpoint source pollution. air pollution consists of chemicals or particles in the air that can harm the health of humans animals and plants. it also damages buildings. watch this brief video picture of practice that captures everyday classroom life and provides real life examples of how students learn and think about freshwater topics. in the united nations general assembly adopted sustainable development goals designed to transform our world by. the sixth goal is to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. according to the united nations one in three people live without sanitation. a lack of sanitation and sanitary waste management systems can reduce a communitys access to clean water and lack of access to clean water can allow diseases to run rampant sometimes creating epidemics of water borne infectious agents. learning about how freshwater systems work in the wilderness rural communities and urban centers can help us better understand the challenges of providing clean water and sanitation to people around the world. humans impact the physical environment in many ways overpopulation pollution burning fossil fuels and deforestation. changes like these have triggered climate change soil erosion poor air quality and undrinkable water. these negative impacts can affect human behavior and can prompt mass migrations or battles over clean water. help your students understand the impact humans have on the physical environment with these classroom resources. plastic is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. some plastics we can reuse or recycleand many play important roles in areas like medicine and public safetybut other items such as straws are designed for only one use. in fact more than percent of plastic is used only once before it is thrown away where it lingers in the environment for a long long time. it often breaks down into smaller and smaller particles called microplastics which can be ingested by both animals and people. fortunately there are things we can do to helplike stop using plastic bags straws and bottles recycling when we can and disposing of waste properly. use these classroom resources to teach about ocean plastics and check back for more coming later this year for the purposes of regulation the united states environmental protection agency identifies two broad categories of pollution point source pollution and nonpoint source pollution. air pollution consists of chemicals or particles in the air that can harm the health of humans animals and plants. it also damages buildings. watch this brief video picture of practice that captures everyday classroom life and provides real life examples of how students learn and think about freshwater topics. national geographic headquarters street nw washington dc careers newsroom privacy notice sustainability policy terms of service code of ethics contact usnational geographic society is a organization. national geographic society. all rights reserved. join our community of educators and receive the latest information on national geographics resources for you and your students. byalina bradford february pollution is the process of making land water air or other parts of the environment dirty and not safe or suitable to use. this can be done through the introduction of a contaminant into a natural environment but the contaminant doesnt need to be tangible. things as simple as light sound and temperature can be considered pollutants when introduced artificially into an environment. toxic pollution affects more than million people worldwide according to pure earth a non profit environmental organization. in some of the worlds worst polluted places babies are born with birth defects children have lost to iq points and life expectancy may be as low as years because of cancers and other diseases. read on to find out more about specific types of pollution. land can become polluted by household garbage and by industrial waste. in americans produced about million tons of solid waste according to the u. s. environmental protection agency. a little over half of the waste million tons was gathered in landfills. only about was recycled or composted. organic material was the largest component of the garbage generated the epa said. paper and paperboard accounted for more than food was and yard trimmings were. plastics comprised about of the solid waste while rubber leather and textiles made up. and metals. wood contributed to. of the garbage glass was. and other miscellaneous materials made up about. commercial or industrial waste is a significant portion of solid waste. according to the university of utah industries use million pounds of materials in order to provide the average american family with needed products for one year. much of it is classified as non hazardous such as construction material and medical waste. hazardous waste is any liquid solid or sludge waste that contain properties that are dangerous of potentially harmful to human health or the environment. industries generate hazardous waste from mining petroleum refining pesticide manufacturing and other chemical production. households generate hazardous waste as well including paints and solvents motor oil fluorescent lights aerosol cans and ammunition. water pollution happens when chemicals or dangerous foreign substances are introduced to water including chemicals sewage pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural runoff or metals like lead or mercury. according to the environmental protection agency of assessed stream miles of lakes and of bay and estuarine areas are not clean enough for fishing and swimming. the epa also states that the united states most common contaminants are bacteria mercury phosphorus and nitrogen. these come from the most common sources of contaminates that include agricultural runoff air deposition water diversions and channelization of streams. water pollution isnt just a problem for the united states. according to united nations million people do not have access to clean water and around. billion do not have access to adequate sanitation. adequate sanitation helps to keep sewage and other contaminants from entering the water supply. according to national oceanic and atmospheric administration of pollution in marine environment comes from the land through sources like runoff. water pollution can also severely affect marine life. for example sewage causes pathogens to grow while organic and inorganic compounds in water can change the composition of the precious resource. according to the epa low levels of dissolved oxygen in the water are also considered a pollutant. dissolved is caused by the decomposition of organic materials such as sewage introduced into the water. warming water can also be harmful. the artificial warming of water is called thermal pollution. it can happen when a factory or power plant that is using water to cool its operations ends up discharging hot water. this makes the water hold less oxygen which can kill fish and wildlife. the sudden change of temperature in the body of water can also kill fish. according to the university of georgia it is estimated that around half of the water withdrawn from water systems in the united states each year is used for cooling electric power plants. in nearly all cases of this water is returned to its source where it can raise the water temperature in an area immediately surrounding the water discharge pipe. depending on water flow the water temperature quickly returns to ambient temperatures that do not harm fish. donn dears former president of tsaugust a not for profit corporation organization focused on energy issues told live science. nutrient pollution also called eutrophication is another type of water pollution. it is when nutrients such as nitrogen are added into bodies of water. the nutrient works like fertilizer and makes algae grow at excessive rates according to noaa. the algae blocks light from other plants. the plants die and their decomposition leads to less oxygen in the water. less oxygen in the water kills aquatic animals. the air we breathe has a very exact chemical composition of it is made up of nitrogen oxygen water vapor and inert gases. air pollution occurs when things that arent normally there are added to the air. a common type of air pollution happens when people release particles into the air from burning fuels. this pollution looks like soot containing millions of tiny particles floating in the air. another common type of air pollution is dangerous gases such as sulfur dioxide carbon monoxide nitrogen oxides and chemical vapors. these can take part in further chemical reactions once they are in the atmosphere creating acid rain and smog. other sources of air pollution can come from within buildings such as secondhand smoke. finally air pollution can take the form of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide or sulfur dioxide which are warming the planet through the greenhouse effect. according to the epa the greenhouse effect is when gases absorb the infrared radiation that is released from the earth preventing the heat from escaping. this is a natural process that keeps our atmosphere warm. if too many gases are introduced into the atmosphere though more heat is trapped and this can make the planet artificially warm according to columbia university. air pollution kills more than million people each year according to a study published in the journal of environmental research letters. the effects of air pollution on human health can vary widely depending on the pollutant according to hugh sealy professor and director of the environmental and occupational health track at the department of public health and preventive medicine st. georges university st. georges grenada. if the pollutant is highly toxic the effects on health can be widespread and severe. for example the release of methyl isocyanate gas at union carbide plant in bhopal in killed over people and over suffered respiratory problems. an irritant may cause respiratory illnesses cardiovascular disease and increases in asthma. the very young the old and those with vulnerable immune systems are most at risk from air pollution. the air pollutant may be carcinogenic or biologically active or radioactive. other air pollutants like carbon dioxide have an indirect impact on human health through climate change sealy told live science. even though humans cant see or smell noise pollution it still affects the environment. noise pollution happens when the sound coming from planes industry or other sources reaches harmful levels. research has shown that there are direct links between noise and health including stress related illnesses high blood pressure speech interference hearing loss. for example a study bythe who noise environmental burden on disease working group found that noise pollution may contribute to hundreds of thousands of deaths per year by increasing the rates of coronary heart disease. under the clean air act the epa can regulate machine and plane noise. underwater noise pollution coming from ships has been shown to upset whales navigation systems and kill other species that depend on the natural underwater world. noise also makes wild species communicate louder which can shorten their lifespan. most people cant imagine living without the modern convenience of electric lights. for the natural world though lights have changed the way that days and nights work. some consequences of light pollution are turning on so many lights may not be necessary. research published by international journal of science and research estimates that over illumination wastes about million barrels of oil per day and lighting is responsible for one fourth of all energy consumption worldwide. additional resourcesstay up to date on the latest science news by signing up for our essentials newsletter. thank you for signing up to live science. you will receive a verification email shortly. there was a problem. please refresh the page and try again. live science is part of future us inc an international media group and leading digital publisher. visit our corporate site. future us inc. west street floor new york ny. select pagea lot of factors like industrialization inefficient garbage disposal littering etc could cause pollution. a number of factories are set up near water bodies for the ease of operation and the waste produced by such factories as bumped into the water bodies. it is extremely harmful if the water is consumed or used. pollution is the contamination of the environment and atmosphere where do we live and make it unable to live in a healthy way. we have provided below short and long essays on pollution in english for your knowledge and information. after going through the essays you will know what pollution is and what are its main causes how to stop pollution its prevention etc. these essays will be helpful in your school college assignments of essay writing speech giving or paragraph writing etc. pollution refers to the presence of contaminants in the natural environment. some of the examples of polluting substances are gases like carbon dioxide carbon monoxide etc solid pollutants like plastic sewage etc and chemicals like fertilizers as well as those produced as byproduct in factories transportation etc. the immediate effect of pollution is that it renders earth s natural resources unusable or in other words harmful to use as well as it also causes species depletion and ecological imbalance. it is very necessary to take essential precautionary and pro active measures to prevent any further damage that will happen due to pollution to earth and its inhabitants. introductionpollution today has become a global concern for the health of the environment as well as the flora and fauna on the planet. pollution has a widespread effect on the environment including the natural resources. it makes the natural elements polluted and harmful to use ultimately making the life on planet suffer. what is pollution when a polluting substance enters into our natural environment and contaminates it this process is called pollution. these pollutants are mostly formed due to several human activities mostly economical in nature. to state few examples carbon monoxide released by transportation vehicles pollute the air trail of oil left by big ocean liners pollute the ocean and makes water harmful for aquatic life. conclusionpollution is the immediate threat that the environment faces today and is also the most prominent one. the clock is ticking continuously and with every passing moment the damage to the environment is increasing. immediate action to preserve the environment against pollution is needed to be taken by the government and other stake holders. introductionin a lay man terms pollution occurs when something unwanted enters into your natural environment. the release of toxic gas on burning of plastic is pollution mixing of harmful chemicals with the soil when it is mixed with chemical fertilizers is pollution when the disposed waste from your house somehow reaches into the open environment it cause pollution. similarly there could be several other examples of pollution. as for now we will discuss below the types of pollution. types of pollutionthe five major types of pollution are given below air pollutionits main source is the burning of fossil fuels by the transportation vehicles and smoke emanated from the factories. water pollutionits main source is the runoff water from urban settlements agricultural fields and release of byproducts from factories. soil pollutionsoil pollution could be caused from several factors like improper disposal of waste use of harmful chemicals in agriculture industry etc. light pollutionlight pollution refers to more than required presence of light in a polluted area which is large enough to interfere with the natural environment. noise pollutionnoise pollution refers to the presence of excessive noise generated by human activities like road transport vehicles jet planes a busy market loudspeaker announcements etc. conclusionwhatever may be the type of pollution it always has a degrading effect on the environment and human health or else affects one or the other living species on earth. light pollution confuses roosting birds often causing fatal accidents. introductiontoday the very existence of human life on planet earth along with the life of other flora and fauna is threatened up to a large extent by the pollution. pollution affects everything essential for survival natural resources species health etc. what is pollutionwhen any external unwanted substance generated by a human activity enters into the environment it causes pollution. causes of pollution are always human induced and the natural cause of pollution is almost negligible. there are a number of human activities those cause pollution. tons of toxic waste generated as a byproduct in factories is left into the rivers and streams polluting them thousands of cubic meters of harmful gases are released by transportation vehicles polluting the air improperly disposed waste from urban settlements got strewn on land and water resulting in land as well as water pollution. now that we have got an idea on what is pollution we will move on to discussing some of the significant effects of pollution. effects of pollution on environmentpollution has a widespread effect on the environment as discussed below polluted airpollution contaminates the natural air making it harmful to breathe. for example toxic gases released by transportation vehicles mix with the air resulting in its pollution. when this air is inhaled by a human or animal it causes severe respiratory ailments. some species of animals and plants which are highly sensitive to such kind of pollution die. polluted water bodiesimproper disposal of waste generated by areas of human settlements cause this waste to reach our naturally occurring water bodies in form of runoff. the urban waste consists of several toxic compounds including plastic. this waste is non biodegradable and stays in water making it hazardous to consume. it also results in the depletion of aquatic species population which are highly sensitive to pollution. soil toxicitypollution cause due to agricultural activities like the use of chemical fertilizers result in toxicity of the soils. chemical fertilizers are made up of harmful chemical compounds which got mixed with the soil ultimately making it toxic. it affects the species of flora as well as fauna those depend on the purity of the soil for their survival. species depletionone of the most prominent effects of pollution on the environment is the depletion of species. when polluting substances get mixed with our natural resources it harms the living species in some way or the other. gaseous pollutants cause severe respiratory ailments and decrease the life expectancy of the fauna and flora as well. global warmingglobal warming is one of the main effects of pollution which leads to a number of environmental effects. gaseous pollutants like carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide released due to the burning of fossil fuels stays in the atmosphere resulting in greenhouse effect. green house effect on the other hand is responsible for a number of factors like unexpected climatic changes resulting in droughts famine etc depletion in aquatic species like coral reefs fishes etc. conclusionthe effect of pollution on the environment is far and wide. not only the pollution effects present but also threaten the future of several species if no concrete action to prevent pollution is taken. the rate at which the pollution is being damaged is way too more than it could be repaired. it might take centuries to reverse the damages that we have done to the environment that too it won t be an easy task and will require strict discipline and will to tackle pollution. introductionpollution refers to the presence of unwanted substances know as pollutants in the environment. pollution is an immediate threat to the environment and causes severe damage to it. lately the world is recognizing the need to deal with the pollution if the earth and its biodiversity are to be preserved. what is pollutionpollution occurs when an unwanted external compound mainly generated due to human activities enters into the environment. these compounds are referred to as the pollutants and cause severe damage to the environment. everything that constitutes the part of the environment that is the water bodies air flora and fauna are in some way or the other get affected by the pollution. moreover pollution also causes global effects like greenhouse gas effects global warming and acid rain. global warming refers to an increase in earth s average surface temperature and results in conditions like famine flood and drought. below we will discuss about the effects of pollution on major indian cities like delhi noida ghaziabad lucknow and varanasi. it must be known that an aqi between to is considered good to is considered as satisfactory to is considered as moderate to is considered as poor to is considered as very poor to is considered as severe and a value above is considered severe plus or emergency. pollution level in delhias per a survey done by the world health organization the national capital territory of delhi stands at the lowest position in terms of air quality index among other major cities around the world. in delhi children are the worst affected and as per a study nearly. million or of all children are suffering irreversible damages due to poor air quality. air quality index of delhi remains usually moderate during january to september months. however the aqi rapidly deteriorates during the onset of winter months from october to december. often during these months the aqi reaches to a hazardous level of plus. the particulate matter levels of pm. and pm particulate matters in delhi reach up the level of micrograms m. this is much above the safe limit which is mg m for pm. particles and mg m for pm particles. burning of the roots of paddy crop during the winter months in the adjoining states of punjab and haryana makes the situation worst in delhi by causing dense smoke. this method is traditionally called parali and is one of the prime constituents of pollution in delhi. pollution level in noidanoida also known as new okhla industrial development authority located in the western uttar pradesh bordering delhi is immediately behind the national capital in terms of poor air quality. incessant construction works in and around noida in addition to the heavy vehicular pollution and cold winter air causes a dense thick smog. the term smog is used for a mixture of smoke and fog suspended in the atmosphere. the air quality index of noida also gets very poor up to the level of during the winter months of october to december. the particulate matter level of this western up district is by and large at par with that of delhi often the two competing with each other for the highest concentration of particulate matters. pollution level in ghaziabadghaziabad often tops the list of north indian cities with worst air quality index and pollution. here also like delhi and noida the aqi goes past the hazardous level of plus mostly during the months of october to december. the main reason behind such a poor air quality index of ghaziabad is industrial pollution and waste burning. the city is flanked by the industries on the outskirts which results in a dense smoke emanating from the factories as well as from the transport vehicles plying to the industrial area. the pm level of ghaziabad reaches up to four times of permissible levels during october to december. sometimes this value is reached during the deepawali festival due to the incessant bursting of crackers and smoke emanated from them. pm particulate matter which has a permissible limit of microgram m often is recorded nearing around micrograms m in ghaziabad. pollution level in lucknowthe air quality index of the capital of uttar pradesh lucknow fluctuates between moderate and poor often crossing the plus mark. though the situation is definitely not as bad as delhi ncr nevertheless it still is alarming and requires concrete action. the worst air quality index of lucknow was recorded as in the first half of the november month. the quantity of suspended particulate matter has also increased significantly in lucknow s residential areas since the last decades. the air of lucknow is found to be consisting of very fine particulate matters pm. with concentration just below microgram m which is very highly hazardous indeed. pollution level in varanasithe ancient pilgrimage city of varanasi has always been in news for its everyday fluctuating population of tourists. being the parliamentary constituency of indian prime minister mr. narendra modi since it has become the centre of development with everyday construction works of some kind or the other. though the construction is good for the city s development point of view it is also causing some of the worst recorded downfalls in its air quality. aqi of varanasi in is ranked at the third position on the world health organization s list of fifteen most polluted cities in the world. the people of varanasi are facing respiratory ailments and other complications due to the ever continuing construction work. recorded air quality index of varanasi reaches up to which falls in the poor category. the level of particulate matter found in varanasi is pm. the value of which fluctuates within the range of microgram m to microgram m which is extremely unhealthy for sensitive groups and children. conclusionindia is home to some of the world s most polluted cities whose position remains almost uniform though sometimes shifting a place up or down. cities like delhi noida calcutta mumbai and varanasi all have obtained a position among the world s most polluted cities. there is an immediate need to tackle the situation with strong will and determination. it is the time when government people industries all should join hands to tackle the pollution and prevent the health and environmental hazards caused by it. more essays on pollution pollution essay air pollution water pollution soil pollution noise pollution land pollution thermal pollutionpollution slogans air pollution slogans water pollution slogans soil pollution slogans noise pollution slogansmore on plastic pollution essay on plastic bag essay on plastic pollution why plastic bags should be banned essay plastic pollution causes effects and solutions why plastic bags are harmful for health related information speech on pollutionparagraph on pollutionarticle on pollutionessay on swachh bharat abhiyanessay on environmentslogans on environmentessay on pollution due to urbanizationessay on pollution and its effectsessay on pollution due to festivalsessay on pollution due to firecrackersessay on environmental pollutionessay on vehicle pollutionshare rate an entrepreneur. masters in computer application and business administration. a passionate writer writing content for many years and regularly writing for indiacelebrating. com and other popular web portals. always believe in hard work where i am today is just because of hard work and passion to my work. i enjoy being busy all the time and respect a person who is disciplined and have respect for others. october october october august featuring of essayfind all please help us to improve contact us. copyright white planet technologies pvt. ltd. all rights reserved. by garima gunjan i have written an essay on pollution. here we get info on what is pollution and its types air water noise environment global warming and climate change. pollution is introducing something into the environment that is dirty unclean or has a harmful effect on the ecosystem. related essays in english pollution is a key issue that has been affecting our earth. although it is an issue that has been prevalent since ancient times in the century its harmful effect has been felt on a large scale. although the governments of different countries have taken several major steps to curb these effects there is still a long way to go. several natural processes and cycles get disturbed due to this. not only that many flora and fauna today either have gone extinct or are endangered. due to the rapid increase in the amount of pollution animals are losing their habitat at a rapid speed. pollution has affected several major cities across the globe. a majority of these polluted cities lie in india. some of the most polluted cities in the world are delhi kanpur bamenda moscow heze chernobyl beijing among others. although these cities have taken several steps to curb pollution they still have a long way to go. the air quality of these places is poor and there are cases of land and water pollution as well. now it s time that the administration of these cities prepares strategies to check these issues. related ten tips on writing a good essay basically there are four types of pollution let s discuss the types of pollution one by one india has seen an increase in the number of vehicles on its roads. these are responsible for transmitting harmful gases such as sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide. these gases are responsible for reducing the quantity of oxygen in the earth s atmosphere. they also cause several breathing problems respiratory diseases types of cancers etc. related essay on terrorism the shortage of potable water is a major repercussion of water pollution. people are forced to drink polluted water due to which they get diseases such as cholera diarrhea dysentery etc. this in turn results in the breeding of mosquitoes which is a cause of many diseases such as dengue. all these factors are responsible for making the soil toxic. apart from that noise from the bursting of crackers functioning of factories music played on loudspeakers especially during the festival season also contribute to noise pollution. if not controlled it can affect the functioning of the brain as well. often the day after the festival of diwali it is reported in the media how the bursting of crackers caused an increase in noise pollution in major cities of india. although these are the four major types of pollution lifestyle changes have caused several other types of pollution as well such as radioactive pollution light pollution among others. if a place ends up getting light in excess or in an unwanted amount then it contributes to light pollution. nowadays several urban areas are facing unwanted glares in excess amounts. this is due to the fact that most indian cities such as mumbai bangalore delhi chennai etc. have an active nightlife. we are living in the nuclear era. since a lot of countries are developing their own nuclear devices it has lead to an increase in the presence of radioactive substances in the atmosphere of the earth. this is known as radioactive pollution. handling and mining of radioactive substances testing minor accidents occurring in radioactive power plants are other major causes contributing to radioactive pollution. related essay on demonetization global warming is another name for climate change. the blanket of pollution that traps the heat around our planet is the main reason why global warming is increasing nowadays. as humans burn fossil fuels vehicles emit harmful gases jungles burn at alarming rates all these factors are the main reasons. once it enters the earth s atmosphere eventually spreading across the globe. as a result heat gets trapped around the earth for the next or years after it starts emitting again. the worst part is harmful gases such as carbon dioxide have increased at an alarming rate. due to this the upcoming generation will feel the effects of global warming for hundreds of years. related essay on global warming the authorities at the national and international levels have taken several steps to curb the pollution issue. some of these are as follows related essay on digital india in english under its banner the uno in had initiated united nations environment program in order to address the issue of pollution. it has issued several issues such as climate change ecosystem management environmental governance resource efficiency etc. it has lead to several successful treaties such as the montreal protocol to limit the emission of gases that were thinning the protective ozone layer minamata convention to limit the use of toxic mercury etc. unep sponsored solar loan programme where lakhs of people from different countries were provided with solar power panels. although the authorities of different cities are working hard to curb the pollution issue however it is the duty of citizens and common people also to contribute to this process. few of the important ways to curb all types of pollution are pollution is a problem that we need to solve at the earliest so that humans can live safely on this planet. it is important that we follow the suggested measures to curb this issue. its our responsibility to make our place a better place for living. in order to make the earth survive we have to stop polluting it. recommended read essay writing in englishessay writing in hinditips to score in english paperten tips on writing a good essaysimple tips and tricks to score well in examinationstips for developing confidencequick exam tips and trickstips and tricks career question and answerstips for success in your careerexam preparation tipsexam stress management tips for parentsanalytical paragraph writing format examples samplesreport writing format how to report writing examples topics samples and typesletter to editor class to topics sample and exampleinformal letter format topics examplesarticle writing format article writing topics and examplesclass writing skills classified advertisement writing examplesletter to editor class to topics sample and exampleleave application for marriage format sample and examplesstory writing for class to format topics examplesjob application with biodata format topics examplesleave application format for office school and sampleessay on the importance of computers in our lifeessay on importance of discipline for success in lifeessay on terrorismessay on skill india missionessay on renewable sources of energyessay on make in india projectessay on haritha haram programessay on corruptionten tips on writing a good essayessay on my aim in life to become an astronaut essay on the importance of educationessay on beti bachao beti padhaoessay on importance of sports and gamesessay on demonetizationessay on pollutionessay on water conservationessay on global warmingessay on diwali in englishessay on holi in englishessay on chandrayaan in englishessay on women empowerment in englishessay on child labour in englishessay on swachh bharat missioncontributions of drdo in indian defenceactive and passive voice definition rules exercise and example sentencescountable and uncountable nouns meaning definition difference and examplesdirect and indirect speech format rules exercise and examplesdeterminers definition types exercise and examplesall about tenses tenses examples types of tenses in english grammarenglish vocabulary for bank po exams synonyms mcq videosnoun definition types exercise with examples in hindi and englishwhat is a verb definition types of verbs exercise and verbs examples in hindi and englishwhat is a preposition definition types exercise and examples in hindi and englishmodals definition modals exercise list of modals with examplesclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questionsclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questions class english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questions class english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english lesson explanationclass lesson explanationall india entrance examsstate entrance examscommon entrance testupcoming entrance exams top entrance exams after entrance exams for jobs after graduationentrance exams for commerce studentsentrance exams after graduationlist of entrance exams for teaching jobsentrance exams for railways recruitmentlist of entrance exams after graduationlist of entrance exams conducted by iitstop mass communication entrance examslist of entrance exams for arts students after graduationentrance exam dates indian army entrance exams pollution comes from all types of sources with various consequences. pollution is harmful to the natural world and human health. if youre environmentally conscious understanding the pollution basics can help you to minimize your contribution to pollution. air pollution is any contamination of the atmosphere that disturbs the natural composition and chemistry of the air. this can be in the form of particulate matter such as dust or excessive gases like carbon dioxide or other vapors that cant be effectively removed through the natural cycles of the carbon cycle or the nitrogen cycle. some of the most excessive sources of air pollution include depending on the concentration of air pollutants several effects can be noticed. for example polluted air results in smog increase higher rain acidity crop depletion from inadequate oxygen and higher rates of asthma in the human population. some scientists believe that climate change is also related to increased air pollution. according to the world health organization each year million people worldwide die from air pollution. who states the annually death rate from ambient outdoor air pollution is. million people worldwide. the organizations statistics also reveal an annual death rate from exposure to household smoke from fuels and dirty cookstoves is. million people. of the worlds population who reports that live where air quality exceeds the limits of the who guidelines. water pollution means any contaminated water whether from chemical particulate or bacterial matter that degrades the waters quality and purity. water pollution can occur in oceans rivers lakes and underground reservoirs. the pollution spreads from different water sources flowing together through the natural water cycle. causes of water pollution include the effects of water pollution include decreasing the quantity of drinkable water available lowering water supplies for crop irrigation and impacting fish and wildlife populations that require water of a certain purity for survival. one of the worst water contaminants is untreated wastewater from municipalities and industries. this type of pollution leaches into the soil and water. the united nations educational scientific and cultural organization reports on municipal and industrial wastewater contamination to world water supplies in various countries. for example in europe of municipal and industrial wastewater is treated but in latin america counties that figure is only. middle east and north africa statistics fall around whereas asia and the pacific region is between and. untreated wastewater is simply released and pollutes land water coastal ecosystems. its estimated that water from u. s. major rivers is used and reused more than times before it finally reaches the ocean. nineteen percent of u. s. households are connected to septic tanks for treatment and disposal of wastewater. the un statistics revealed. of the u. s. population was connected to wastewater treatment. soil or land pollution is soil contamination that prevents the natural growth and balance of the land. pollution can be present in land used for cultivation habitation or as a wildlife preserve. some soil pollution is deliberate such as the creation of landfills. however much of soil land pollution is accidental and can have widespread effects. soil pollution sources include soil contamination can lead to poor growth and reduced crop yields. wildlife habitats can be destroyed. water and visual pollution are often the result of soil pollution. other results include soil erosion and desertification. according to the conservation institute soil pollution is attributed to deforestation and soil erosion agricultural chemicals industrialization mining landfills and human sewage. the loss of topsoil is attributed to fertilizers and the use of pesticides in farming practices. these chemicals create a breeding ground for harmful and devastating fungi that lead to land erosion. noise pollution refers to undesirable levels of noises caused by human activity that disrupt the standard of living in the affected area. noise pollution can come from some noise pollution may be temporary while other sources are more permanent. effects may include hearing loss wildlife disturbances and a general degradation of lifestyle. early childhood development and education can be impaired from noise. the who reports that studies and statistics on children exposed to chronic aircraft noise suffer from impaired cognitive performance well being and moderate evidence of blood pressure and catecholamine hormone secretions are effected. the who reports environmental noise and its effect on human health. in the eu road traffic noise exceeds db with of the eu population exposed. suffer from exposure to more than db levels. more than are exposed to nighttime noise levels of more than db. the acoustical society of america reports that in only to americans were exposed to noise created by vehicles. that percentage in was.. radioactive pollution is rare but extremely detrimental and even deadly when it occurs. because of its intensity and the difficulty of reversing damage there are strict government regulations to control radioactive pollution. sources of radioactive contamination include radiation pollution can cause birth defects cancer sterilization and other health problems for human and wildlife populations. it can also sterilize the soil and contribute to water and air pollution. according to the u. s. nuclear regulatory commission of radioactive pollution is the result of natural sources while comes from anthropogenic sources. thermal pollution is excess heat that creates undesirable effects over long periods of time. the earth has a natural thermal cycle but excessive temperature increases can be considered a rare type of pollution with long term effects. many types of thermal pollution are confined to areas near their source but multiple sources can have wider impacts over a greater geographic area. thermal pollution may be caused by when temperatures increase mild climatic changes may be observed. swift changes make wildlife populations vulnerable and they may be unable to recover. thermal pollution can be seen as a result of various manufacturers. for example illinois state water survey reports the highest heat emissions worldwide are found in the mississippi river generated by coal burning power plants. the most polluted basin in the world from thermal pollution is found in europe the rhine river. light pollution is the over illumination of an area that is considered obtrusive. light pollution isnt just found in cities. much of the modern world suffers from light pollution. sources include light pollution can interfere with the normal sleep cycle. if it is near residential areas light pollution can also degrade the quality of life for residents. light pollution makes it impossible to see stars therefore interfering with astronomical observation and personal enjoyment. the national institutes of health reveals a growing body of work that suggests light pollution may have long term ill effect on humans and wildlife. exposure to light photons that hit your retinas can disrupt the circadian rhythm of humans and animals. another effect of light pollution is the inability to see the night sky. this is troublesome to astronomers and anyone wishing to enjoy star gazing. in the new world atlas of artificial night sky brightness reported that of the world resides under light pollution. in fact of the populations of the united states and europe live under skies of light pollution. more than a third of the worlds population is unable to see the milky way. this breaks down to north americans and europeans never see the milky way. visual pollution is more than an aesthetic eyesore or undesirable unattractive views. it can lower the quality of life in certain areas and have an economic impact on property values as well as personal enjoyment. sources of visual pollution include while visual pollution has a few health or environmental effects is the pollution that can have detrimental affects. most of the effects impact those living near or in this type of pollution. visual pollution presents a hazard and alters the community identity. for example visual pollution can be distracting while driving a vehicle or operating equipment and can lead to traffic congestion. the european scientific journal published a study in june called visual pollution can have a deep degrading effect on urban and suburban community a study in few places of bengal india with special reference to unorganized billboards. the study concluded that developed countries recognized and were taking steps to reduce visual pollution. the researchers concluded that in developing countries garbage is a greater nuisance and health problem than it is a visual pollution issue. personal pollution is the contamination of ones body and lifestyle with detrimental actions. this may include according to the epa personal pollution includes all types of pharmaceuticals and personal care products. the human and veterinarian products create trace environmental pollutants found in both surface waters and ground waters. personal pollution gained its own category but no studies have been made directly assessing personal pollution. however there are studies on various types of personal pollution such as turf fertilizers found in epa reports on nutrient pollution another type of pollution not commonly reported. the epa reports nutrient pollution is a challenge since it is a big problem that is spread throughout the u. s. excessive phosphorous and nitrogen discharged into the water and air is largely blamed on personal pollution or human activities such as fertilizers sewage discharge from treatment plants animal manure runoff pet waste and more. row crop runoff and animal feeding operations are a major cause. intertwined with other forms of pollution such as its carriers of air and water and personal pollution nutrient pollution impacts all of these areas as well as human health. water charged with nutrient pollution can generate algae that overcomes the water systems. shellfish aquatic and marine life suffer when they absorb the toxins created by algae blooms. eating contaminated shellfish or drinking water from this source can make a person very ill and in extreme cases lead to death. the mississippi river basin runs through states before it empties into the gulf of mexico. nutrient pollution effects this ecosystem. the epa reports in the united states littering is a form of pollution that can fall into several other types of pollutions such as personal visual water and soil. any type of waste or trash carelessly discarded without proper disposal is the definition of littering. this can include anything from fast food containers bottles paper and plastic packaging sales receipts electronic waste etc. the type of litter often determines the effect it has on the environment. for example some litter contains harmful chemicals that can find their way into water and soil. plastics can harm wildlife that either get trapped in plastic bags and die or marine life that consumes small pieces of broken down plastic. the leading national nonprofit keep america beautiful reports statistics on the types of litter in the united states. these figures show less litter in residential neighborhoods than along the roads. when it comes to convenience stores and commercial areas the surrounding roadways have more litter. keep america beautiful report on percentages of roadside litter and sources all types of pollution are interconnected. for example light pollution requires energy to be made which means the electric plant needs to burn more fossil fuels to supply the electricity. those fossil fuels can contribute to air pollution which returns to the earth as acid rain and increases water pollution. the cycle of pollution can go on indefinitely but once you understand the different pollution types how they are created and the effects they can have you can make personal lifestyle changes to combat poor conditions for yourself and others around you. air purifiers and humidifiers have different functions. air purifiers are clean indoor air but do nothing for indoor humidity levels. they remove dust and smoke from the air as well as allergenic substances like animal dander and pollen. humidifiers add water into the air but do not clean it. air purifiers and humidifiers have different functions. air purifiers are clean indoor air but do nothing for indoor humidity levels. they remove dust and smoke from the air as well as allergenic substances like animal dander and pollen. humidifiers add water into the air but do not clean it. they are used to relieve health issues from dry air and help reduce static electricity in the home. air purifiers remove particles and other pollutants from indoor air. there are two main types of air purifiers those that use mechanical filters to separate out particulate matter and those that use electrostatic methods to trap electrically charged particles. ionizers which produce negative ions create a negative charge on suspended particles which then settle out of the air and stick to the next surface they contact where they can be wiped up. some air purifiers were found to produce ozone which is implicated in producing inflammation of the respiratory system and worsening asthma symptoms. ultraviolet or uv air purifiers kill bacteria and other pathogens and are commonly used in hospitals and day care centers. uv light purification has also become available in residential hvac unitsmechanical air purifiers use filters to remove relatively large airborne pollutants such as dust and pet dander from the air. filters are often made from foam pleated paper or polyester or some other synthetic material. a high efficiency particulate air filter commonly known as hepa is capable of removing. percent of airborne particles. hepa filters can remove extremely small particles but can not remove odors. an air purifier may combine a hepa filter with a charcoal filter to help reduce odors. humidifiers add water to indoor air increasing the relative humidity of the indoor environment. dry winter air can cause chapped skin and contribute to respiratory problems. adding moisture to the air with a humidifier can reduce dry skin and decrease breathing problems including lessening coughs. adding humidity to indoor air can also reduce static electricity and prevent wooden furniture from cracking. four main types of humidifiers are ultrasonic impeller driven evaporative and steam vaporizers. ultrasonic and impeller humidifiers both produce a cool mist. ultrasonic models are quiet because they use ultrasonic waves to produce mist while impeller models use a rotating disk that can produce noise. evaporative humidifiers use a fan to evaporate water into the air and are also cold humidifiers. steam vaporizers create a warm mist by heating water with an electrical element. some models allow the mist to cool slightly before exiting the machine and are known as warm mist humidifiers. the standing water in humidifiers can become home to a wide variety of bacteria mold and fungi. when the humidifier is turned on these organisms can be released into your home s air and breathing them can cause lung problems and even infections. in the past disinfectants used with humidifiers have also created problems. minerals from the humidifier s water tank can be released into the air where they settle out as a fine white dust. humidifiers that use heat to evaporate water are prone to mineral build up on the heating element and the filters in evaporative humidifiers can also harbor bacteria and molds. you must keep humidifiers clean and you need to occasionally descale them to remove mineral build up. reviewed by tom iarocci m. d. karen s. garvin has been a professional writer since when dragon magazine published her first article. her recent work includes encyclopedia entries on historical subjects. she holds a bachelor s degree in communications and is pursuing a masters degree in european history. her interests include photography science history and steampunk. pollution refers to the addition of contaminating substances to the natural environment resulting in an adverse impact on the environment. pollution is human made and the level of pollution of the environment has increased with the rise in human population and developments made by the human civilization. pollution can be of different types depending on the part of the environment that is getting polluted or the type of pollutants contaminants causing the pollution. air water and soil pollution are the major types of pollution. however given the wide range of ways in which our species have managed to contaminate the environment we also have noise light radioactive thermal and plastic pollution. the different types of pollution have been discussed in greater details below. air pollution refers to the release of pollutants like toxic gases biological molecules and particulate matter into the atmosphere. the pollutants can be derived from several sources including both natural processes and human activity. volcanic eruptions limnic eruptions automobile and industrial effluents etc. are some examples of air pollution sources. carbon monoxide carbon dioxide chlorofluorocarbons aerosol sprays etc. are some examples of air pollutants. such pollution can be highly detrimental to the health and well being of all life forms on earth. in simple terms the contamination of water bodies likes lakes rivers ponds aquifers etc. by pollutants is called water pollution. like air pollution water pollution is one of the most harmful types of pollution. it can have extremely disastrous consequences for all living beings using the contaminated water. a major volume of the all the pollutants produced on land end up in water bodies. toxic wastes released by industries pathogens released in sewage harmful chemicals present in agricultural runoffs etc. are some of the top water pollutants. the contamination of water can lead to epidemics and even pandemics that can wipe out the population of an entire species or even more than one species. thus water pollution has a highly adverse impact on the environment society and economy of a place. when the soil of an area is contaminated it leads to soil pollution or land degradation. the soil is essential to the growth of all plants including crops. thus a degradation in the soil quality translates to lower yields and poor health of crops grown on such soil. industrial and agricultural chemicals are the common pollutants contaminating the soil. when the environment is filled with unnecessary or unpleasant sounds that are harmful to animals and plants it is called noise pollution. transport vehicles machinery industries loud music people yelling etc. are some of the most common sources of noise pollution. this type of pollution on the long term can give rise to chronic diseases like cardiovascular diseases. the psychological health of people can also be affected by noise. as the name suggests plastic pollution is caused by plastic accumulation in the environment. plastic a non biodegradable substance is extremely harmful to all life on earth. every year thousands of animals lose their lives due to plastic pollution. ingestion of plastics or entanglement in plastic objects kill these animals. most of the plastic waste generated in the world end up in the oceans where they cause great harm to the marine ecosystem. when radioactive substances are present in areas where their presence is undesirable or unintended it results in a type of pollution called radioactive contamination. such substances are highly toxic to all life on earth. radioactive substances trigger mutations in the genetic material of living organisms leading to different types of cancers. exposure to such toxins can also adversely impact the different systems of the body. death or disfiguration are common effects of exposure to radioactive waste. irresponsible management of such wastes or radioactive disasters are the common causes of radioactive contamination. the pollution of the night environment by anthropogenic light is known as light pollution. this type of pollution is caused by an excessive lighting of the streets flood lights used in stadiums lights used in an industrial area etc. the negative effects of light pollution include the spoilage of the aesthetic environment of a place creating disturbances in the ecosystem and also harming the health of living creatures. an induced change in the temperature of large volumes of water causes thermal pollution. this type of pollution leads to the degradation of water quality as the warm water does not provide ideal living conditions for aquatic flora and fauna. for example when water used as a coolant in power plants or that used in industries is released into a natural water body the warm or hot water mixes with the rest of the water to raise the overall temperature of the aquatic ecosystem. higher temperatures also alter the composition of dissolved elements in water. the flora and fauna living in the area that was earlier adapted to a particular temperature range can be killed by this abrupt change in the water temperature. thus aquatic life experiences a thermal shock due to thermal pollution. everyone loves to see clean and green spaces and beautiful vistas. when human activity installs ugly barriers to this vision of open and clutter free landscapes it is called visual pollution. the installation of billboards open storage of trash networks of electric wires crisscrossing each other above the street etc. create visual pollution. this type of pollution generates distraction eye fatigues diversity in opinions and other psychological problems. when waste products generated by humans is not disposed of properly it is called littering. here waste can include anything that is discarded by humans after use like bottles glass packaging material electronic waste metal waste etc. some of these pollutants like electronics batteries tires etc. are hazardous to the health of the environment. when chemicals from such wastes leach into the soil or enter the water bodies they cause soil contamination and water pollution. finally these chemicals enter the bodies of organisms to cause disease and death. all maps graphics flags photos and original descriptions worldatlas. comenvironmental pollution is currently the biggest challenge facing the word today. in the united states of rivers and of lakes are too polluted for fishing swimming and aquatic life. not surprising though when. trillion gallons of untreated storm water industrial waste and untreated sewage are being discharge annually into american waters. one third of the topsoil in the world is already degraded and with the current rate of soil degradation caused be improper agricultural and industrial practices and deforestation most of the world s topsoil could be gone within the next years. the great smog in killed people in london. this event was caused by a period of cold weather combined with windless conditions that formed a dense layer of airborne pollutants mostly from coal plants over the city. there are many sources of pollution and each one has its own effect on the environment and living organisms. this article will discuss the causes and effects of the different kinds of pollution. there are many causes of pollution including chemical pollution into bodies of water and soil through improper disposal practices and agricultural activities and noise and light pollution created by cities and urbanization as a result of population growth. air and noise pollution can have adverse effects on animals plants and humans. although air and water pollution has been improving over the last few decades they are still a large topic in the discussion today. there are two types of air pollutants primary and secondary. primary pollutants are emitted directly from their source while secondary pollutants are formed when primary pollutants react in the atmosphere. the burning of fossil fuels for transportation and electricity produces both primary and secondary pollutants and is one of the biggest sources of air pollution. the fumes from car exhausts contain dangerous gases and particulates including hydrocarbons nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide. these gases rise into the atmosphere and react with other atmospheric gases creating even more toxic gases. according to the earth institute the heavy use of fertilizer for agriculture is a major contributor of fine particulate air pollution with most of europe russia china and the united states being affected. the level of pollution caused by agricultural activities is thought to outweigh all other sources of fine particulate air pollution in these countries. ammonia is the primary air pollutant that comes from agricultural activities. ammonia enters the air as a gas from concentrated livestock waste and fields that are over fertilized. this gaseous ammonia then combines with other pollutants such as nitrogen oxides and sulfates created by vehicles and industrial processes to create aerosols. aerosols are tiny particles that can penetrate deep into the lungs and cause heart and pulmonary disease. other agricultural air pollutants include pesticides herbicides and fungicides. all of which also contribute to water pollution. nutrient pollution is caused by wastewater sewage and fertilizers. the high levels of nutrients in these sources end up in bodies of water and promote algae and weed growth which can make the water undrinkable and depleted oxygen causing aquatic organisms to die. pesticides and herbicides applied to crops and residential areas concentrate in the soil and are carried to the groundwater by rainwater and runoff. for these reasons anytime someone drills a well for water it must be checked for pollutants. industrial waste is one of the main causes of water pollution by creating primary and secondary pollutants including sulphur lead and mercury nitrates and phosphates and oil spills. in developing countries around of their solid waste is dumped directly into the ocean or sea. this causes serious problems including the harming and killing of sea creatures which ultimately affects humans. land pollution is the destruction of land as a result of human s activities and the misuse of land resources. this occurs when humans apply chemicals such as pesticides and herbicides to the soil dispose of waste improperly and irresponsibly exploit minerals through mining. soil is also polluted through leaking underground septic tanks sewage systems the leaching of harmful substances from landfill and direct discharge of waste water by industrial plants into rivers and oceans. rain and flooding can bring pollutants from other already polluted lands to soil at other locations. over farming and over grazing by agricultural activities causes the soil to lose its nutrient value and structure causing soil degradation another type of soil pollution. landfills can leach harmful substances into the soil and water ways and create very bad smells and breeding grounds for rodents that transmit diseases. noise is considered an environmental pollutant caused by household sources social events commercial and industrial activities and transportation. light pollution is caused by the prolonged and excessive use of artificial lights at night that can cause health problems in humans and disrupt natural cycles including wildlife activities. sources of light pollution include electronic billboards night sports grounds street and car lights city parks public places airports and residential areas. pollution affects the earth s land air and water by releasing pollutants in the air water and land. pollution ends up in these forms including dust smog and toxic gas emissions. in addition to the natural sources of pollution they can also come from human activity. these sources include industries such as mining manufacturing plants power plants oil refineries and transportation that release pollutants into the air or water. high levels of air pollution can cause an increased risk of heart attack wheezing coughing and breathing problems and irritation of the eyes nose and throat. air pollution can also cause worsening of existing heart problems asthma and other lung complications. like humans animals can suffer from a number of health problems due to air pollution including birth defects reproductive failure and diseases. air pollution causes a number of environmental effects in addition to the effects on humans and animals. acid rain contains high levels of nitric and sulfuric acids that are created by oxides and sulfur oxides released into the air by the burning of fossil fuels. acid rain damages trees and acidifies soils and water bodies making the water too acidic for fish and other aquatic life. nitrogen oxides released into the air by the burning of fossil fuels also contribute to the nitrogen responsible for toxic algae blooms. the release of man made compounds including hydrochlorofluorocarbons chlorofluorocarbons and halons formerly used as coolants foaming agents pesticides solvents aerosol propellants and fire extinguishers are depleting the ozone. the ozone layer in the stratosphere forms a protective layer that reflects harmful ultraviolet rays back into space that would otherwise destroy animal and plant life. water pollution is a serious threat to humans animals and aquatic life. the effects of water pollution depend on which chemicals are being dumped where. bodies of water that are near urbanized areas tend to be heavily polluted by dumbing of garbage and chemicals both legally and illegally by industrial plants health centers and individuals. by far the biggest consequence of water pollution is the death of aquatic creatures which can disrupt the entire food chain. pollutants such as cadmium mercury and lead are eaten by tiny aquatic organisms that are then eaten by fish and shell fish becoming more concentrated with each step up the food chain and causing serious problems in humans and wildlife. nutrient pollution can cause toxic algal blooms in drinking water sources that create toxins that kill fish and other aquatic animals. direct exposure to this toxic alga causes serious health problems in humans including neurological effects respiratory problems stomach and liver illness and rashes. a consequential problem is created when disinfectants used to treat drinking water reach water polluted with toxic algae they react creating dioxins. dioxins are extremely harmful chemical compounds that have been linked with reproductive and development problems and even cancer. nitrates caused by fertilizers also contaminate drinking water and according to the environmental protection agency babies who consume water that is high in nitrates can become seriously ill with blue baby syndrome which causes shortness of breath and blue tinted skin and can lead to death if not treated early. land and soil pollution has substantial consequences for humans animals microorganisms and aquatic life. contaminated land and soil can cause various problems on the skin respiratory problems and even different kinds of cancers. these toxic substances come into contact with the human body directly through eating fruits and vegetables that have been grown in polluted soils being consumed through drinking water that has been contaminated direct contact with the skin and breathing in air polluted with particles and dust. deforestation is the biggest concern when it comes to land degradation and soil erosion. clear cutting of vegetation and tree cover creates harsh conditions that destroy ecosystems and habitats. deforestation also creates an imbalance in atmospheric conditions reducing the amount of carbon that is naturally taken out of the atmosphere. this is a serious problem considering that most pollution created by people is carbon based. noise pollution can cause stress anxiety headaches irritability hearing loss and sleep loss resulting in decreased productivity. oil drills submarines and other vessels on and in the ocean can cause excessive noise that has resulted in the injury or death of marine animals especially whales. too much light causes eye strain and stress harming our eyes and decreasing our quality of life. light pollution also causes a decrease in the hormone melatonin that helps us to fall asleep resulting in restlessness and fatigue. many mammals insects birds and reptiles are photoperiodic meaning their movement mating growth and development and eating cycles are regulated by natural light patterns. light pollution can interfere with these natural behaviors and cycles causing a decrease in wildlife populations. pollution needs to be dramatically reduced because it is destroying the environment we live in contaminating our food and water causing diseases and cancers in humans and wildlife and destroying the air we breathe and the atmosphere that protects us from harmful ultra violet radiation. it is the responsibility of every living person to protect the environment and with the population ever increasing pollution problems are only going to get worse unless we do something about it. protecting the environment is a long and daunting task requiring continuous planning governmental policies and public and industrial participation. however the result of ignoring the problem will be catastrophic and life as we know it will begin to end. by decreasing waste implementing recycling policies banning dangerous agricultural chemicals and developing safe renewable energy we can significantly reduce the amount of pollution going into the environment annually and increase our quality of living. everyone is entitled to clean air to breathe water to drink and public lands to enjoy. if you have any ideas on how to reduce pollution please drop a comment and share your thoughts. recent postsecavo. com participates in the amazon services llc associates program. from time to time we may recommend a product for you to purchase for a specific purpose and will often link to amazon s website for you to easily complete that purchase. if you buy a product at amazon after clicking one of our links we may earn a commission. water bodies e. g. lake river ocean and ground water get contaminated due to discharge of pollutants in the water bodies without any treatment to remove harmful compounds. water pollution adversely affects not only aquatic plants and animals but it also affects human beings and ecosystems. water pollution is caused due to several reasons. here are the few major causes of water pollution sewage and waste water sewage garbage and liquid waste of households agricultural lands and factories are discharged into lakes and rivers. these wastes contain harmful chemicals and toxins which make the water poisonous for aquatic animals and plants. dumping dumping of solid wastes and litters in water bodies causes huge problems. litters include glass plastic aluminum styrofoam etc. different things take different amount of time to degrade in water. they affect aquatic plants and animals. industrial waste industrial waste contains pollutants like asbestos lead mercury and petrochemicals which are extremely harmful to both people and environment. industrial waste is discharged into lakes and rivers by using fresh water making the water contaminated. oil pollution sea water gets polluted due to oil spilled from ships and tankers while traveling. the spilled oil does not dissolve in water and forms a thick sludge polluting the water. acid rain acid rain is pollution of water caused by air pollution. when the acidic particles caused by air pollution in the atmosphere mix with water vapor it results in acid rain. global warming due to global warming there is an increase in water temperature. this increase in temperature results in death of aquatic plants and animals. this also results in bleaching of coral reefs in water. eutrophication eutrophication is an increased level of nutrients in water bodies. this results in bloom of algae in water. it also depletes the oxygen in water which negatively affects fish and other aquatic animal population. it is very important to prevent the polluting of water bodies and remove existing contaminants or reducing the concentration of these contaminants so as to make it fit for desired use. following are some of the ways of treating polluted water industrial treatment the raw sewage is needed to be treated correctly in a water treatment plant before it can be safely released into the environment. to reduce the amount and toxicity of waste it is passed through a number of chambers and chemical processes in water treatment plant. denitrification conversion of nitrates in gas is called denitrification. it is an ecological approach to prevent leaching of nitrates in soil. it stops ground water from getting contaminated. ozone waste water treatment ozone waste water treatment method is becoming very popular. in this method the pollutants in water are broken down by an ozone generator. ozone oxidizes bacteria molds organic material and other pollutants in water. septic tanks septic tanks are used to treat sewage at the place of location instead of treating it in any plant or sewage system. this system is used at the individual building level. the sewage is separated into solid and liquid components and treated separately. it s an old adage no water no life. we don t give much thought about using water cautiously even though it is the basis of our daily life. with the increasing scarcity of water everywhere it has become imperative to use water judiciously and conserve it as much as we can. with the lockdown being enforced about go in hyderabad the go is a government order that was issued in that followed the precautionary principle in order to protect the reservoirs mainly the drinking water requirement of hyderabad. the saddest part of the go is despite the protection of these lakes by the government the rapid urbanization and selfish attitude the nagpur municipal corporation is possible to make rainwater harvesting compulsory for all buildings occupied and driven by institutions. it is the first of its kind move proposed by the rainwater harvesting committee. a couple of days ago the committee carried a meeting at the nmc head office which was organized by mayor sandip while oil is one of the prime movers of the world economy the scarcity of water is likely to be one of the biggest challenges in the coming years. a large number of people including those in developing nations still do not have access to safe drinking water. the scarcity of pure drinking water is your details has been submitted successfully. the information provided herein have been collected from publicly available sources and is yet to be verified as per rera guidelines. read more.. the information sources used here include onsite interviews marketing material and other information sources on the internet. the information related to ownership of this property are also based on material gathered from public sources mentioned above or as has been declared to us by the owners person listing the property. these data have not yet been verified against authentic documents and are only indicative of the actual situation of this property project or land holding and their ownership. at commonfloor we provide this information to help our users find publicly available data in a structured format. we are in the process of connecting with the relevant owners and verifying the data as per the provisions of the real estate act. we will keep updating the information here regularly. while we believe that the information provided to you is correct on the basis of the data provided to us please consider this data and information as indicative and use your judgement and verify any information before making any decision. copyright commonfloor. com. all rights reserved. jump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. istockair pollution refers to the release of pollutants into the airpollutants which are detrimental to human health and the planet as a whole. according to the world health organization each year air pollution is responsible for nearly seven million deaths around the globe. nine out of ten human beings currently breathe air that exceeds the who s guideline limits for pollutants with those living in low and middle income countries suffering the most. in the united states the clean air act established in authorizes the u. s. environmental protection agency to safeguard public health by regulating the emissions of these harmful air pollutants. most air pollution comes from energy use and production says john walke director of the clean air project part of the climate and clean energy program at nrdc. burning fossil fuels releases gases and chemicals into the air. and in an especially destructive feedback loop air pollution not only contributes to climate change but is also exacerbated by it. air pollution in the form of carbon dioxide and methane raises the earth s temperature walke says. another type of air pollution smog is then worsened by that increased heat forming when the weather is warmer and there s more ultraviolet radiation. climate change also increases the production of allergenic air pollutants including mold and pollen. we ve made progress over the last years improving air quality in the united states thanks to the clean air act says kim knowlton senior scientist and deputy director of the nrdc science center. but climate change will make it harder in the future to meet pollution standards which are designed to protect health. the effects of air pollution on the human body vary depending on the type of pollutant and the length and level of exposureas well as other factors including a person s individual health risks and the cumulative impacts of multiple pollutants or stressors. these are the two most prevalent types of air pollution. smog occurs when emissions from combusting fossil fuels react with sunlight. soot is made up of tiny particles of chemicals soil smoke dust or allergensin the form of either gas or solidsthat are carried in the air. the sources of smog and soot are similar. both come from cars and trucks factories power plants incinerators engines generally anything that combusts fossil fuels such as coal gas or natural gas walke says. smog can irritate the eyes and throat and also damage the lungs especially those of children senior citizens and people who work or exercise outdoors. it s even worse for people who have asthma or allergies these extra pollutants can intensify their symptoms and trigger asthma attacks. the tiniest airborne particles in soot whether gaseous or solid are especially dangerous because they can penetrate the lungs and bloodstream and worsen bronchitis lead to heart attacks and even hasten death. in a report from harvard s t. h. chan school of public health showed covid mortality rates in areas with more soot pollution were higher than in areas with even slightly less showing a correlation between the virus s deadliness and long term exposure to fine particulate matter and illuminating an environmental justice issue. because highways and polluting facilities have historically been sited in or next to low income neighborhoods and communities of color the negative effects of this pollution have been disproportionately experienced by the people who live in these communities. in the union of concerned scientists found that soot exposure was percent higher for asian americans on average than for other americans. for black people the exposure rate was percent higher for latinos percent higher. a number of air pollutants pose severe health risks and can sometimes be fatal even in small amounts. almost of them are regulated by law some of the most common are mercury lead dioxins and benzene. these are also most often emitted during gas or coal combustion incinerating orin the case of benzenefound in gasoline walke says. benzene classified as a carcinogen by the epa can cause eye skin and lung irritation in the short term and blood disorders in the long term. dioxins more typically found in food but also present in small amounts in the air can affect the liver in the short term and harm the immune nervous and endocrine systems as well as reproductive functions. mercury attacks the central nervous system. in large amounts lead can damage children s brains and kidneys and even minimal exposure can affect children s iq and ability to learn. another category of toxic compounds polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are by products of traffic exhaust and wildfire smoke. in large amounts they have been linked to eye and lung irritation blood and liver issues and even cancer. in one study the children of mothers exposed to pahs during pregnancy showed slower brain processing speeds and more pronounced symptoms of adhd. by trapping the earth s heat in the atmosphere greenhouse gases lead to warmer temperatures which in turn lead to the hallmarks of climate change rising sea levels more extreme weather heat related deaths and the increased transmission of infectious diseases. in carbon dioxide accounted for percent of the country s total greenhouse gas emissions and methane made up percent. carbon dioxide comes from combusting fossil fuels and methane comes from natural and industrial sources including large amounts that are released during oil and gas drilling walke says. we emit far larger amounts of carbon dioxide but methane is significantly more potent so it s also very destructive. another class of greenhouse gases hydrofluorocarbons are thousands of times more powerful than carbon dioxide in their ability to trap heat. in october more than countries reached an agreement to reduce the use of these chemicalswhich are found in air conditioners and refrigeratorsand develop greener alternatives over time. though president trump was unwilling to sign on to this agreement a bipartisan group of senators overrode his objections in and set the united states on track to slash hfcs by percent by. according to david doniger senior strategic director of nrdc s climate and clean energy program the agreed to hfc phasedown will avoid the equivalent of more than billion tons of carbon dioxide over the next years. mold and allergens from trees weeds and grass are also carried in the air are exacerbated by climate change and can be hazardous to health. though they aren t regulated and are less directly connected to human actions they can be considered a form of air pollution. when homes schools or businesses get water damage mold can grow and can produce allergenic airborne pollutants knowlton says. mold exposure can precipitate asthma attacks or an allergic response and some molds can even produce toxins that would be dangerous for anyone to inhale. pollen allergies are worsening because of climate change. lab and field studies are showing that pollen producing plantsespecially ragweedgrow larger and produce more pollen when you increase the amount of carbon dioxide that they grow in knowlton says. climate change also extends the pollen production season and some studies are beginning to suggest that ragweed pollen itself might be becoming a more potent allergen. if so more people will suffer runny noses fevers itchy eyes and other symptoms. air pollution is now the world s fourth largest risk factor for early death. according to the most recent state of global air reportwhich summarizes the latest scientific understanding of air pollution around the world. million deaths were linked to outdoor air pollution exposures in and another. million deaths were caused by indoor air pollution. despite improvements in reducing global average mortality rates from air pollution the world s most populous countries india and china continue to bear the highest burdens of disease says vijay lamaye staff scientist at the nrdc science center. this report is a sobering reminder that the climate crisis threatens to worsen air pollution problems significantly if we fail to act to cut carbon pollution. a post shared by nrdc some four out of ten u. s. residents million peoplelive in counties with unhealthy levels of air pollution according to the state of the air report by the american lung association. since the annual report was first published in its findings have shown how the clean air act has been able to reduce harmful emissions from transportation power plants and manufacturing. recent findings however reflect how climate changefueled wildfires and extreme heat are adding to the challenges of protecting public health. the latest reportwhich focuses on ozone year round particle pollution and short term particle pollutionalso finds that people of color are percent more likely than white people to live in a county with a failing grade in at least one of those categories and three times more likely to live in a county that fails in all three. in rankings for each of the three pollution categories covered by the ala report california cities occupy the top three slots despite significant gains the golden state has made in the past half century. at the other end of the spectrum burlington vermont honolulu and wilmington north carolina consistently rank among the country s best cities for air quality. no one wants to live next door to an incinerator oil refinery port toxic waste dump or other polluting site. yet millions of people around the world do and this puts them at a much higher risk for respiratory disease cardiovascular disease neurological damage cancer and death. in the united states people of color are. times more likely than whites to live in areas with poor air quality according to the ala. historically racist zoning policies and the discriminatory lending practices known as redlining have combined to keep polluting industries and car choked highways away from white neighborhoods and have turned communities of colorespecially poor and working class communities of colorinto sacrifice zones where residents are forced to breathe dirty air and suffer the many health problems associated with it. in addition to the increased health risks that come from living in such places members of these communities experience economic harm in the form of missed workdays higher medical costs and local underinvestment. environmental racism isnt limited to cities and industrial areas. outdoor laborers including the estimated three million migrant and seasonal farmworkers in the united states are among the most vulnerable to air pollutionand also among the least equipped politically to pressure employers and lawmakers to affirm their right to breathe clean air. recently cumulative impact mapping which uses data on environmental conditions and demographics has been able to show how some communities are overburdened with layers of issues like high levels of poverty unemployment and pollution. tools like the environmental justice screening method and the epa s ejscreen provide evidence of what many environmental justice communities have been explaining for decades that we need land use and public health reforms to ensure that vulnerable areas are not overburdened and that the people who need resources most are receiving them. in the united states the clean air act has been a crucial tool for reducing air pollution since its passage in although fossil fuel interests aided by industry friendly lawmakers have frequently attempted to weaken its many protections. ensuring that this bedrock environmental law remains intact and properly enforced will always be key to maintaining and improving our air quality. but the best most effective way to control air pollution is to speed up our transition to cleaner fuels and industrial processes. by switching over to renewable energy sources maximizing fuel efficiency in our vehicles and replacing more and more of our gasoline powered cars and trucks with electric versions well be limiting air pollution at its source while also curbing the global warming that heightens so many of its worst health impacts. and what about the economic costs of controlling air pollution according to a report on the clean air act commissioned by nrdc the annual benefits of cleaner air are up to times greater than the cost of clean air regulations. those benefits include up to avoided premature deaths fewer hospital admissions for cardiac and respiratory illnesses and net economic benefits of up to. trillion for the u. s. economy every year. the less gasoline we burn the better we re doing to reduce air pollution and harmful effects of climate change walke says. make good choices about transportation. when you can walk ride a bike or take public transportation. for driving choose a car that gets better miles per gallon of gas or choose an electric car. you can also investigate your power provider optionsyou may be able to request that your electricity be supplied by wind or solar. buying your food locally cuts down on the fossil fuels burned in trucking or flying food in from across the country. and most important support leaders who push for clean air and water and responsible steps on climate change walke says. this story was originally published on november and has been updated with new information and links. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. to a college student who grew up surrounded by heavy truck traffic warehouses and commercial hubs in one of california s most polluted communities the push to electrify transportation is more than just urgent health policyit s personal. the global toll of premature deaths attributed to the burning of coal gasoline and diesel is breathtakingly high with new research doubling previous estimates. a new study shows that most of us humans are likely inhaling more air pollution each year. for years the clean air act has proved that health and prosperity go hand in hand. the landmark law is now under threat. david doniger senior strategic director of the climate clean energy program has helped shape federal and global climate related policies since he joined nrdc in. the trump administration failed to monitor air pollution in the toxic aftermath of hurricane harvey. also trump is taking a chainsaw to our protections and the epa can t count to. plus the solar industry pleads for mercy and the president says he thinks about climate change all the time. hmm. as greenhouse gasses fill the sky a progressive governor and worried residents take on oil and gasthe state s most powerful industry. also the self styled environmentalist in chief skips a climate summit and the epa s science advisory board misses a big big deadline. plus national parks are getting hazy and trump makes a quixotic bid to buy greenland. trump also kills years of child health research and continues to neglect chemical safety. the tireless efforts of locals are reshaping one of new jersey s most polluted areas. the air in southwestern indiana is bad enough without the emissions from yet another proposed polluter. ten years after the disaster at a tennessee power plant the cleanup crew is seeking justice. at the same time the trump administration is weakening protections for this toxic pollution. interior s bernhardt helped bury a damning pesticide report the clean air committee goes soft on soot and trump nominates a climate change denier to the fed board. trump s wildfire lies zinke s acronym defense and the epa s forced altruism involving truck pollution. everything you wanted to know about our changing climate but were too afraid to ask. so take it somewhere else says chicago s southeast side. residents who live near the country s busiest ports are getting a new lens on the pollution in their backyards and new tactics to help fight it. nrdc s gina ramirez is helping to bring attention to the wafts of manganese dust that plague her family and neighbors on chicago s southeast side. short answer yes. even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet. trump won t sign the g climate commitment pruitt doesn t have time for smog limits and zinke cancels science. as temperatures and carbon levels rise even breathing has become a challenge. here s what you can do to help clear the air. trump rolls back fuel efficiency standards while his epa chief celebrates the country s clean air. scientist kim knowlton monitors the inextricable connections between the planets fragile health and our own. since this giant salty lake in the desert lost its water supply its bird habitat has been shrinking and more toxic dust is wafting up from its dry lake bed. can the salton sea be saved considering making the switch heres everything you need to know about driving electric cars and hybrids. the new proposal would take us backward on climate tilt the grid toward coal and actually kill people. every time you go outside you may be inhaling harmful chemicals. but dont hold your breath. just use your head. so many technological innovations in the automobile industry stem directly from guidelines intended to reduce gas guzzling. if we lose these guidelines we ll also lose a lot of our workforce. roadside plants helped officials trace the source of a public health crisis and led to new standards for clean air in oregon. southeast side residents have been plagued by a heavy metal that s known to negatively impact the brain function of children. a step by step guide to protecting your community from dirty development projects. plus your one and only chance to save the clean power plan and steve bannon s role in the paris climate withdrawal. sometimes the best way to turn your anger into action is to pick up the phone. follow these tips to minimize your anxiety and maximize your impact. the epa lets states pollute other states air the atlantic coast pipeline fails and fails again to follow the law and ryan zinke actually says the government works for oil companies. but plans to cut local carbon pollution might help this asthma capital shake its wheezy reputation. a recent study found that the state is home to four of the country s most polluting power plants. but elected officials won t even show up to hear their constituents concerns about it. oil trains won t get better brakes air conditioners won t get safer chemicals and children lose their epa advocate. when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosureshelp save naturein this article we discuss the major causes of pollution in a bid to understand how we are contributing to environmental degradation directly or indirectly. in this article we discuss the major causes of pollution in a bid to understand how we are contributing to environmental degradation directly or indirectly. a study conducted in revealed that percent of deaths in the world are directly or indirectly related to air water and land pollution. basically environmental pollution is a phenomenon wherein certain pollutants are introduced in the environment either knowingly or unknowingly. this in turn hampers the balance of the ecosystem and triggers various environmental issues. the severity of pollution depends on chemical nature and concentration of these pollutants in the environment. there are different types of pollution the major ones being air pollution water pollution and land pollution. irrespective of which part of the world we are talking about each of these three types have different causes and therefore they have to be discussed individually. while pollution is caused by natural as well as man made sources it is the man made pollution which is adding to the severity of this issue and threatening the existence of life on the planet. to a large extent environmental pollution can be attributed to various human activities such as transportation industrial production construction mining agriculture etc. these activities which are technically referred to as the anthropogenic causes of pollution have been polluting the environment since ages. however the rate at which pollution is happening today we are left with no option but to take a serious note of it. air pollution is one of the major environmental problems in the world. the united states which constitutes for approximately percent of the world population alone produces percent of the total carbon dioxide in the world. among the leading causes of air pollution human transportation is by far the most prominent. millions of vehicles dump tons of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere every single day. other than these vehicles industrial plants which release various harmful gases by burning fossil fuels have a major share in polluting the air. it may come as a surprise for many but agricultural activities such as clearance of land for agriculture and use of pesticides also contribute to this form of pollution to a significant extent. water pollution is a broad concept which encompasses the pollution of inland water sources as well as ocean bodies on the planet. while inland water sources have been turned into virtual dumping sites owing to industrial pollution ocean bodies bear the brunt of marine transportation and oil spills. the amount of sewage waste generated by a single household may not seem much but if we take into consideration the fact that there are millions of households things become serious. a significant proportion of waste produced in these homes is directed to water sources without being subjected to proper treatment. other than sewage fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture also contaminate water. they make their way to water sources through surface runoff during precipitation. as for ocean pollution causes oil spills have a major role to play. the rising number of oil spills over the last few years is in fact a serious concern. land pollution also known as soil pollution is actually the process wherein soil is contaminated due to the introduction of some harmful chemical substances in it. among the various human activities which contribute to land pollution agriculture and mining are perhaps the most prominent ones. when it comes to soil pollution the list of contaminants includes chlorinated hydrocarbons chromium cadmium lead zinc etc. other than the practice of agriculture and mining dumping of industrial and domestic waste in the soil also pollutes it. the harmful chemicals which are suspended in the air get dissolved in rainwater and pollute the soil when they come to the earth s surface in the form of acid rain. similarly surface runoff transports contaminants from one place to another and adds to land pollution. owing to the interrelationship between these forms of pollution one can t afford to ignore their causes and effects. while many people are of the opinion that pollution is only caused due to chemical substances the fact is that even energy in excess can cause pollution. noise pollution and thermal pollution are the best examples of the same. if you are still not able to understand the seriousness of the issue maybe a closer look at its harmful effects will come as an eye opener for you. like it share it uncategorized our site includes quite a bit of content so if youre having an issue finding what youre looking for go on ahead and use that search feature there copyright help save nature buzzle. com inc. quail hill pkwy suite irvine ca there are many sources of pollution. anything which disturbs natural environment can cause pollution. much of pollution is caused by human activities although there are natural causes such as forest fires. humans are currently the main contributor to pollution of our planet. for example industrial waste in water bodies damages and disturbs the water life. excess noise from automobiles cities and airplanes causes noise pollution. to learn more about the causes of air pollution specifically see this answer. to learn more about the causes of water pollution specifically see this answer. to learn more about the causes of land pollution specifically see this answer. see below... pollution is harmful material released into the environment. one result of air pollution is acid rain. this occurs when exhaust from industries mixes with moisture in the air. this precipitation then falls as acid rain. it has damaged historic buildings bridges cathedrals and monuments across western europe. over the years acid rain has also damaged forests and freshwater lakes. categoriesair pollution is the presence of substances in the atmosphere that are harmful to the health of humans and other living beings or cause damage to the climate or to materials. there are many different types of air pollutants such as gases particulates and biological molecules. air pollution may cause diseases allergies and even death to humans it may also cause harm to other living organisms such as animals and food crops and may damage the natural environment or built environment. both human activity and natural processes can generate air pollution. air pollution is a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related diseases including respiratory infections heart disease copd stroke and lung cancer. growing evidence suggests that air pollution exposure may be associated with reduced iq scores impaired cognition increased risk for psychiatric disorders such as depression and detrimental perinatal health. the human health effects of poor air quality are far reaching but principally affect the bodys respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. individual reactions to air pollutants depend on the type of pollutant a person is exposed to the degree of exposure and the individuals health status and genetics. outdoor air pollution alone causes. to. million deaths annually making it one of the top contributors to human death. overall air pollution causes the deaths of around million people worldwide each year and is the worlds largest single environmental health risk. indoor air pollution and poor urban air quality are listed as two of the worlds worst toxic pollution problems in the blacksmith institute worlds worst polluted places report. the scope of the air pollution crisis is enormous of the worlds population breathes dirty air to some degree. although the health consequences are extensive the way the problem is handled is often haphazard. productivity losses and degraded quality of life caused by air pollution are estimated to cost the world economy trillion per year but along with health and mortality impacts are an externality to the contemporary economic system and most human activity albeit sometimes being moderately regulated and monitored. various pollution control technologies and strategies are available to reduce air pollution. to reduce the impacts of air pollution both international and national legislation and regulation have been implemented to regulate air pollution. local laws where well enforced have led to strong public health improvements. at the international level some of these efforts have been successful for example the montreal protocol was successful at reducing release of harmful ozone depleting chemicals or the helsinki protocol which reduced sulfur emissions while other attempts have so far been less successful in implementation such as international action on climate change. an air pollutant is a material in the air that can have adverse effects on humans and the ecosystem. the substance can be solid particles liquid droplets or gases. a pollutant can be of natural origin or man made. pollutants are classified as primary or secondary. primary pollutants are usually produced by processes such as ash from a volcanic eruption. other examples include carbon monoxide gas from motor vehicle exhausts or sulfur dioxide released from factories. secondary pollutants are not emitted directly. rather they form in the air when primary pollutants react or interact. ground level ozone is a prominent example of a secondary pollutant. some pollutants may be both primary and secondary they are both emitted directly and formed from other primary pollutants. pollutants emitted into the atmosphere by human activity include secondary pollutants include minor air pollutants include persistent organic pollutants are organic compounds that are resistant to environmental degradation through chemical biological and photolytic processes. because of this they have been observed to persist in the environment to be capable of long range transport bioaccumulate in human and animal tissue biomagnify in food chains and to have potentially significant impacts on human health and the environment. these are mostly related to the burning of fuel. there are also sources from processes other than combustion air pollutant emission factors are reported representative values that attempt to relate the quantity of a pollutant released to the ambient air with an activity associated with the release of that pollutant. these factors are usually expressed as the weight of pollutant divided by a unit weight volume distance or duration of the activity emitting the pollutant. such factors facilitate estimation of emissions from various sources of air pollution. in most cases these factors are simply averages of all available data of acceptable quality and are generally assumed to be representative of long term averages. there are compounds in the list of persistent organic pollutants. dioxins and furans are two of them and intentionally created by combustion of organics like open burning of plastics. these compounds are also endocrine disruptors and can mutate the human genes. the united states environmental protection agency has published a compilation of air pollutant emission factors for a wide range of industrial sources. the united kingdom australia canada and many other countries have published similar compilations as well as the european environment agency. air pollution risk is a function of the hazard of the pollutant and the exposure to that pollutant. air pollution exposure can be expressed for an individual for certain groups or for entire populations. for example one may want to calculate the exposure to a hazardous air pollutant for a geographic area which includes the various microenvironments and age groups. this can be calculated as an inhalation exposure. this would account for daily exposure in various settings. the exposure needs to include different age and other demographic groups especially infants children pregnant women and other sensitive subpopulations. the exposure to an air pollutant must integrate the concentrations of the air pollutant with respect to the time spent in each setting and the respective inhalation rates for each subgroup for each specific time that the subgroup is in the setting and engaged in particular activities. for example a small childs inhalation rate will be less than that of an adult. a child engaged in vigorous exercise will have a higher respiration rate than the same child in a sedentary activity. the daily exposure then needs to reflect the time spent in each micro environmental setting and the type of activities in these settings. the air pollutant concentration in each microactivity microenvironmental setting is summed to indicate the exposure. for some pollutants such as black carbon traffic related exposures may dominate total exposure despite short exposure times since high concentrations coincide with proximity to major roads or participation to traffic. a large portion of total daily exposure occurs as short peaks of high concentrations but it remains unclear how to define peaks and determine their frequency and health impact. in the who halved its recommended guideline limit for tiny particles from burning fossil fuels. the new limit for nitrogen dioxide is lower. a lack of ventilation indoors concentrates air pollution where people often spend the majority of their time. radon gas a carcinogen is exuded from the earth in certain locations and trapped inside houses. building materials including carpeting and plywood emit formaldehyde gas. paint and solvents give off volatile organic compounds as they dry. lead paint can degenerate into dust and be inhaled. intentional air pollution is introduced with the use of air fresheners incense and other scented items. controlled wood fires in cook stoves and fireplaces can add significant amounts of harmful smoke particulates into the air inside and out. indoor pollution fatalities may be caused by using pesticides and other chemical sprays indoors without proper ventilation. carbon monoxide poisoning and fatalities are often caused by faulty vents and chimneys or by the burning of charcoal indoors or in a confined space such as a tent. chronic carbon monoxide poisoning can result even from poorly adjusted pilot lights. traps are built into all domestic plumbing to keep sewer gas and hydrogen sulfide out of interiors. clothing emits tetrachloroethylene or other dry cleaning fluids for days after dry cleaning. though its use has now been banned in many countries the extensive use of asbestos in industrial and domestic environments in the past has left a potentially very dangerous material in many localities. asbestosis is a chronic inflammatory medical condition affecting the tissue of the lungs. it occurs after long term heavy exposure to asbestos from asbestos containing materials in structures. sufferers have severe dyspnea and are at an increased risk regarding several different types of lung cancer. as clear explanations are not always stressed in non technical literature care should be taken to distinguish between several forms of relevant diseases. according to the world health organization these may be defined as asbestosis lung cancer and peritoneal mesothelioma. biological sources of air pollution are also found indoors as gases and airborne particulates. pets produce dander people produce dust from minute skin flakes and decomposed hair dust mites in bedding carpeting and furniture produce enzymes and micrometre sized fecal droppings inhabitants emit methane mold forms on walls and generates mycotoxins and spores air conditioning systems can incubate legionnaires disease and mold and houseplants soil and surrounding gardens can produce pollen dust and mold. indoors the lack of air circulation allows these airborne pollutants to accumulate more than they would otherwise occur in nature. even at levels lower than those considered safe by united states regulators exposure to three components of air pollution fine particulate matter nitrogen dioxide and ozone correlates with cardiac and respiratory illness. in air pollution caused one in eight deaths in europe and was a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related diseases including respiratory infections heart disease copd stroke and lung cancer. the health effects caused by air pollution may include difficulty in breathing wheezing coughing asthma and worsening of existing respiratory and cardiac conditions. these effects can result in increased medication use increased doctor or emergency department visits more hospital admissions and premature death. the human health effects of poor air quality are far reaching but principally affect the bodys respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. individual reactions to air pollutants depend on the type of pollutant a person is exposed to the degree of exposure and the individuals health status and genetics. the most common sources of air pollution include particulates ozone nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. children aged less than five years who live in developing countries are the most vulnerable population in terms of total deaths attributable to indoor and outdoor air pollution. the world health organization estimated in that every year air pollution causes the premature death of some million people worldwide. studies published in march indicated that the number may be around. million. india has the highest death rate due to air pollution. india also has more deaths from asthma than any other nation according to the world health organization. in december air pollution was estimated to kill people in china each year. there is a positive correlation between pneumonia related deaths and air pollution from motor vehicle emissions. annual premature european deaths caused by air pollution are estimated at an important cause of these deaths is nitrogen dioxide and other nitrogen oxides emitted by road vehicles. in a consultation document the uk government disclosed that nitrogen dioxide is responsible for premature uk deaths per annum. across the european union air pollution is estimated to reduce life expectancy by almost nine months. causes of deaths include strokes heart disease copd lung cancer and lung infections. urban outdoor air pollution is estimated to cause. million deaths worldwide per year. children are particularly at risk due to the immaturity of their respiratory organ systems. the us epa estimated in that a proposed set of changes in diesel engine technology could result in fewer premature mortalities fewer heart attacks fewer emergency department visits by children with asthma and fewer respiratory related hospital admissions each year in the united states. the us epa has estimated that limiting ground level ozone concentration to parts per billion would avert to premature deaths nationwide in compared with the ppb standard. the agency projected the more protective standard would also prevent an additional cases of aggravated asthma and more than a million cases of missed work or school. following this assessment the epa acted to protect public health by lowering the national ambient air quality standards for ground level ozone to parts per billion. a new economic study of the health impacts and associated costs of air pollution in the los angeles basin and san joaquin valley of southern california shows that more than people die prematurely each year because air pollution levels violate federal standards. the number of annual premature deaths is considerably higher than the fatalities related to auto collisions in the same area which average fewer than per year. a study found that outdoor air pollution is associated with substantially increased mortality even at low pollution levels below the current european and north american standards and who guideline values shortly before the who adjusted its guidelines. the largest cause is air pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion mostly the production and use of cars electricity production and heating. needed diesel exhaust is a major contributor to combustion derived particulate matter air pollution. in several human experimental studies using a well validated exposure chamber setup de has been linked to acute vascular dysfunction and increased thrombus formation. the mechanisms linking air pollution to increased cardiovascular mortality are uncertain but probably include pulmonary and systemic inflammation. a study by greenpeace estimates there are. million annual premature deaths worldwide because of pollutants released by high emission power stations and vehicle exhausts deaths occur in the middle east each year due to pollution. a study by scientists of u. k. and u. s. universities that uses a high spatial resolution model and an updated concentration response function concluded in that. million global excess deaths in and. million in or a fifth were due to air pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion significantly higher than earlier estimates and with spatially subdivided mortality impacts. a review of evidence found that ambient air pollution exposure is a risk factor correlating with increased total mortality from cardiovascular events. air pollution is also emerging as a risk factor for stroke particularly in developing countries where pollutant levels are highest. a study found that in women air pollution is not associated with hemorrhagic but with ischemic stroke. air pollution was also found to be associated with increased incidence and mortality from coronary stroke in a cohort study in. associations are believed to be causal and effects may be mediated by vasoconstriction low grade inflammation and atherosclerosis other mechanisms such as autonomic nervous system imbalance have also been suggested. research has demonstrated increased risk of developing asthma and copd from increased exposure to traffic related air pollution. additionally air pollution has been associated with increased hospitalization and mortality from asthma and copd. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease includes diseases such as chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a study conducted in in the wake of the great smog of compared london residents with residents of gloucester peterborough and norwich three towns with low reported death rates from chronic bronchitis. all subjects were male postal truck drivers aged to. compared to the subjects from the outlying towns the london subjects exhibited more severe respiratory symptoms reduced lung function and increased sputum production and purulence. the differences were more pronounced for subjects aged to. the study controlled for age and smoking habits so concluded that air pollution was the most likely cause of the observed differences. more studies have shown that air pollution exposure from traffic reduces lung function development in children and lung function may be compromised by air pollution even at low concentrations. air pollution exposure also cause lung cancer in non smokers. it is believed that much like cystic fibrosis by living in a more urban environment serious health hazards become more apparent. studies have shown that in urban areas people suffer mucus hypersecretion lower levels of lung function and more self diagnosis of chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a review of evidence regarding whether ambient air pollution exposure is a risk factor for cancer in found solid data to conclude that long term exposure to pm. increases the overall risk of non accidental mortality by per a microg m increase. exposure to pm. was also associated with an increased risk of mortality from lung cancer and total cardiovascular mortality. the review further noted that living close to busy traffic appears to be associated with elevated risks of these three outcomes increase in lung cancer deaths cardiovascular deaths and overall non accidental deaths. the reviewers also found suggestive evidence that exposure to pm. is positively associated with mortality from coronary heart diseases and exposure to so increases mortality from lung cancer but the data was insufficient to provide solid conclusions. another investigation showed that higher activity level increases deposition fraction of aerosol particles in human lung and recommended avoiding heavy activities like running in outdoor space at polluted areas. in a large danish epidemiological study found an increased risk of lung cancer for people who lived in areas with high nitrogen oxide concentrations. in this study the association was higher for non smokers than smokers. an additional danish study also in likewise noted evidence of possible associations between air pollution and other forms of cancer including cervical cancer and brain cancer. in a study of taiwanese residents over a period of estimated that every g m decrease in the ambient concentration of pm. was associated with a reduced risk of chronic kidney disease development. in the united states despite the passage of the clean air act in in at least million americans were living in non attainment areasregions in which the concentration of certain air pollutants exceeded federal standards. these dangerous pollutants are known as the criteria pollutants and include ozone particulate matter sulfur dioxide nitrogen dioxide carbon monoxide and lead. protective measures to ensure childrens health are being taken in cities such as new delhi india where buses now use compressed natural gas to help eliminate the pea soup smog. a recent study in europe has found that exposure to ultrafine particles can increase blood pressure in children. according to a who report in polluted air leads to the poisoning of millions of children under the age of resulting in the death of some six hundred thousand children annually. prenatal exposure to polluted air has been linked to a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders in children. for example exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons was associated with reduced iq scores and symptoms of anxiety and depression. they can also lead to detrimental perinatal health outcomes that are often fatal in developing countries. a study found that pahs might play a role in the development of childhood attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. researchers have also begun to find evidence for air pollution as a risk factor for autism spectrum disorder. in los angeles children who were living in areas with high levels of traffic related air pollution were more likely to be diagnosed with autism between years of age. the connection between air pollution and neurodevelopmental disorders in children is thought to be related to epigenetic dysregulation of the primordial germ cells embryo and fetus during a critical period. some pahs are considered endocrine disruptors and are lipid soluble. when they build up in adipose tissue they can be transferred across the placenta. ambient levels of air pollution have been associated with preterm birth and low birth weight. a who worldwide survey on maternal and perinatal health found a statistically significant association between low birth weights and increased levels of exposure to pm.. women in regions with greater than average pm. levels had statistically significant higher odds of pregnancy resulting in a low birth weight infant even when adjusted for country related variables. the effect is thought to be from stimulating inflammation and increasing oxidative stress. a study by the university of york found that in exposure to pm. was strongly associated with of preterm births globally which was approximately. million premature births. the countries with the highest air pollution associated preterm births were in south and east asia the middle east north africa and west sub saharan africa. the source of pm. differs greatly by region. in south and east asia pregnant women are frequently exposed to indoor air pollution because of wood and other biomass fuels being used for cooking which are responsible for more than of regional pollution. in the middle east north africa and west sub saharan africa fine pm comes from natural sources such as dust storms. the united states had an estimated preterm births associated with exposure to pm. in. a study performed by wang et al. between the years of and has found a correlation between sulfur dioxide and total suspended particulates and preterm births and low birth weights in beijing. a group of pregnant women in four separate regions of beijing were monitored from early pregnancy to delivery along with daily air pollution levels of sulfur dioxide and tsp. the estimated reduction in birth weight was. g for every g m increase in so and. g for each g m increase in tsp. these associations were statistically significant in both summer and winter although summer was greater. the proportion of low birth weight attributable to air pollution was. this is the largest attributable risk ever reported for the known risk factors of low birth weight. coal stoves which are in of homes are a major source of air pollution in this area. brauer et al. studied the relationship between air pollution and proximity to a highway with pregnancy outcomes in a vancouver cohort of pregnant woman using addresses to estimate exposure during pregnancy. exposure to no no co pm and pm. were associated with infants born small for gestational age. women living less than meters away from an expressway or highway were more likely to give birth to a sga infant. even in areas with relatively low levels of air pollution public health effects can be significant and costly since a large number of people breathe in such pollutants. a study published in found that even in areas of the u. s. where ozone and pm. meet federal standards medicare recipients who are exposed to more air pollution have higher mortality rates. a scientific study for the british columbia lung association showed that a small improvement in air quality would produce million in annual savings in the metro vancouver region in. this finding is based on health valuation of lethal and sub lethal affects. in scientists found that the boundary layer air over the southern ocean around antarctica is unpolluted by humans. data is accumulating that air pollution exposure also affects the central nervous system. in a june study conducted by researchers at the university of rochester medical center published in the journal environmental health perspectives it was discovered that early exposure to air pollution causes the same damaging changes in the brain as autism and schizophrenia. the study also shows that air pollution also affected short term memory learning ability and impulsivity. lead researcher professor deborah cory slechta said that when we looked closely at the ventricles we could see that the white matter that normally surrounds them hadnt fully developed. it appears that inflammation had damaged those brain cells and prevented that region of the brain from developing and the ventricles simply expanded to fill the space. our findings add to the growing body of evidence that air pollution may play a role in autism as well as in other neurodevelopmental disorders. in a study of mice air pollution also has a more significant negative effect on males than on females. in experimental studies reported the detection of significant episodic cognitive impairment from impurities in indoor air breathed by test subjects who were not informed about changes in the air quality. researchers at the harvard university and suny upstate medical university and syracuse university measured the cognitive performance of participants in three different controlled laboratory atmospheres that simulated those found in conventional and green buildings as well as green buildings with enhanced ventilation. performance was evaluated objectively using the widely used strategic management simulation software simulation tool which is a well validated assessment test for executive decision making in an unconstrained situation allowing initiative and improvisation. significant deficits were observed in the performance scores achieved in increasing concentrations of either volatile organic compounds or carbon dioxide while keeping other factors constant. the highest impurity levels reached are not uncommon in some classroom or office environments. air pollution increases the risk of dementia in people over years old. in india in it was reported that air pollution by black carbon and ground level ozone had reduced crop yields in the most affected areas by almost half in when compared to levels. air pollution costs the world economy trillion per year as a result of productivity losses and degraded quality of life according to a joint study by the world bank and the institute for health metrics and evaluation at the university of washington. these productivity losses are caused by deaths due to diseases caused by air pollution. one out of ten deaths in was caused by diseases associated with air pollution and the problem is getting worse. the problem is even more acute in the developing world. children under age in lower income countries are more than times as likely to die from exposure to air pollution as children in high income countries. the report states that additional economic losses caused by air pollution including health costs and the adverse effect on agricultural and other productivity were not calculated in the report and thus the actual costs to the world economy are far higher than trillion. artificial air pollution may be detectable on earth from distant vantage points such as other planetary systems via atmospheric seti including no pollution levels and with telescopic technology close to today. it may also be possible to detect extraterrestrial civilizations this way. the worlds worst short term civilian pollution crisis was the bhopal disaster in india. leaked industrial vapours from the union carbide factory belonging to union carbide inc. u. s. a. killed at least people and injured from to. the united kingdom suffered its worst air pollution event when the december great smog of formed over london. in six days more than died and more recent estimates put the figure at nearer. an accidental leak of anthrax spores from a biological warfare laboratory in the former ussr in near sverdlovsk is believed to have caused at least deaths. the worst single incident of air pollution to occur in the us occurred in donora pennsylvania in late october when people died and over were injured. there are now practical alternatives to the principal causes of air pollution various pollution control technologies and strategies are available to reduce air pollution. at its most basic level land use planning is likely to involve zoning and transport infrastructure planning. in most developed countries land use planning is an important part of social policy ensuring that land is used efficiently for the benefit of the wider economy and population as well as to protect the environment. because a large share of air pollution is caused by combustion of fossil fuels such as coal and oil the reduction of these fuels can reduce air pollution drastically. most effective is the switch to clean power sources such as wind power solar power hydro power which dont cause air pollution. efforts to reduce pollution from mobile sources includes expanding regulation to new sources increased fuel efficiency conversion to cleaner fuels and conversion to electric vehicles. titanium dioxide has been researched for its ability to reduce air pollution. ultraviolet light will release free electrons from material thereby creating free radicals which break up vocs and nox gases. one form is superhydrophilic. in prof. tony ryan and prof. simon armitage of university of sheffield prepared a meter by meter sized poster coated with microscopic pollution eating nanoparticles of titanium dioxide. placed on a building this giant poster can absorb the toxic emission from around cars each day. a very effective means to reduce air pollution is the transition to renewable energy. according to a study published in energy and environmental science in the switch to renewable energy in the united states would eliminate about premature mortalities per year and about in if no biomass were used. this would save about billion in health costs a year due to reduced air pollution in or about. of the u. s. gross domestic product. air quality improvement is a near term benefit among the many societal benefits from climate change mitigation. there is limited evidence that efforts to reduce particulate matter in the air can result in better health in africa the middle east eastern europe central asia and southeast asia. the following items are commonly used as pollution control devices in industry and transportation. they can either destroy contaminants or remove them from an exhaust stream before it is emitted into the atmosphere. spatiotemporal monitoring of air quality may be necessary for improving air quality and thereby the health and safety of the public and assessing impacts of interventions. such monitoring is done to different extents with different regulatory requirements with discrepant regional coverage by a variety of organizations and governance entities such as using a variety of technologies for use of the data and sensing such mobile iot sensors satellites and monitoring stations. in general there are two types of air quality standards. the first class of standards set maximum atmospheric concentrations for specific pollutants. environmental agencies enact regulations which are intended to result in attainment of these target levels. the second class take the form of a scale with various thresholds which is used to communicate to the public the relative risk of outdoor activity. the scale may or may not distinguish between different pollutants. in canada air pollution and associated health risks are measured with the air quality health index. it is a health protection tool used to make decisions to reduce short term exposure to air pollution by adjusting activity levels during increased levels of air pollution. the aqhi is a federal program jointly coordinated by health canada and environment canada. however the aqhi program would not be possible without the commitment and support of the provinces municipalities and ngos. from air quality monitoring to health risk communication and community engagement local partners are responsible for the vast majority of work related to aqhi implementation. the aqhi provides a number from to to indicate the level of health risk associated with local air quality. occasionally when the amount of air pollution is abnormally high the number may exceed. the aqhi provides a local air quality current value as well as a local air quality maximums forecast for today tonight and tomorrow and provides associated health advice. as it is now known that even low levels of air pollution can trigger discomfort for the sensitive population the index has been developed as a continuum the higher the number the greater the health risk and need to take precautions. the index describes the level of health risk associated with this number as low moderate high or very high and suggests steps that can be taken to reduce exposure. the measurement is based on the observed relationship of nitrogen dioxide ground level ozone and particulates with mortality from an analysis of several canadian cities. significantly all three of these pollutants can pose health risks even at low levels of exposure especially among those with pre existing health problems. when developing the aqhi health canadas original analysis of health effects included five major air pollutants particulates ozone and nitrogen dioxide as well as sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide. the latter two pollutants provided little information in predicting health effects and were removed from the aqhi formulation. the aqhi does not measure the effects of odour pollen dust heat or humidity. ta luft is the german air quality regulation. air pollution hotspots are areas where air pollution emissions expose individuals to increased negative health effects. they are particularly common in highly populated urban areas where there may be a combination of stationary sources and mobile sources of pollution. emissions from these sources can cause respiratory disease childhood asthma cancer and other health problems. fine particulate matter such as diesel soot which contributes to more than. million premature deaths around the world each year is a significant problem. it is very small and can lodge itself within the lungs and enter the bloodstream. diesel soot is concentrated in densely populated areas and one in six people in the u. s. live near a diesel pollution hot spot. while air pollution hotspots affect a variety of populations some groups are more likely to be located in hotspots. previous studies have shown disparities in exposure to pollution by race and or income. hazardous land uses tend to be located where property values and income levels are low. low socioeconomic status can be a proxy for other kinds of social vulnerability including race a lack of ability to influence regulation and a lack of ability to move to neighborhoods with less environmental pollution. these communities bear a disproportionate burden of environmental pollution and are more likely to face health risks such as cancer or asthma. studies show that patterns in race and income disparities not only indicate a higher exposure to pollution but also higher risk of adverse health outcomes. communities characterized by low socioeconomic status and racial minorities can be more vulnerable to cumulative adverse health impacts resulting from elevated exposure to pollutants than more privileged communities. blacks and latinos generally face more pollution than whites and asians and low income communities bear a higher burden of risk than affluent ones. racial discrepancies are particularly distinct in suburban areas of the southern united states and metropolitan areas of the midwestern and western united states. residents in public housing who are generally low income and can not move to healthier neighborhoods are highly affected by nearby refineries and chemical plants. air pollution is usually concentrated in densely populated metropolitan areas especially in developing countries where environmental regulations are relatively lax or nonexistent. however even populated areas in developed countries attain unhealthy levels of pollution with los angeles and rome being two examples. between and the incidence of lung cancer in beijing near doubled. while smoking remains the leading cause of lung cancer in china the number of smokers is falling while lung cancer rates are rising. in europe council directive ec on ambient air quality assessment and management provides a common strategy against which member states can set objectives for ambient air quality in order to avoid prevent or reduce harmful effects on human health and the environment... and improve air quality where it is unsatisfactory. on july in the case dieter janecek v freistaat bayern the european court of justice ruled that under this directive citizens have the right to require national authorities to implement a short term action plan that aims to maintain or achieve compliance to air quality limit values. this important case law appears to confirm the role of the ec as centralised regulator to european nation states as regards air pollution control. it places a supranational legal obligation on the uk to protect its citizens from dangerous levels of air pollution furthermore superseding national interests with those of the citizen. in the european commission threatened the uk with legal action against the successive breaching of pm limit values. the uk government has identified that if fines are imposed they could cost the nation upwards of million per year. in march the greater london built up area remains the only uk region in breach of the ecs limit values and has been given months to implement an emergency action plan aimed at meeting the eu air quality directive. the city of london has dangerous levels of pm concentrations estimated to cause deaths per year within the city. as well as the threat of eu fines in it was threatened with legal action for scrapping the western congestion charge zone which is claimed to have led to an increase in air pollution levels. in response to these charges boris johnson mayor of london has criticised the current need for european cities to communicate with europe through their nation states central government arguing that in future a great city like london should be permitted to bypass its government and deal directly with the european commission regarding its air quality action plan. this can be interpreted as recognition that cities can transcend the traditional national government organisational hierarchy and develop solutions to air pollution using global governance networks for example through transnational relations. transnational relations include but are not exclusive to national governments and intergovernmental organisations allowing sub national actors including cities and regions to partake in air pollution control as independent actors. particularly promising at present are global city partnerships. these can be built into networks for example the c cities climate leadership group of which london is a member. the c is a public non state network of the worlds leading cities that aims to curb their greenhouse emissions. the c has been identified as governance from the middle and is an alternative to intergovernmental policy. it has the potential to improve urban air quality as participating cities exchange information learn from best practices and consequently mitigate carbon dioxide emissions independently from national government decisions. a criticism of the c network is that its exclusive nature limits influence to participating cities and risks drawing resources away from less powerful city and regional actors. according to a projection by half of the worlds pollution emissions could be generated by africa. potential contributors to such an outcome include increased burning activities traffic agri food and chemical industries sand dust from the sahara and overall population growth. according to oecd by outdoor air pollution is projected to become the top cause of environmentally related deaths worldwide. global warming portal environment portalcategorieswater pollution is the contamination of water bodies usually as a result of human activities in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services that it would otherwise provide. water bodies include for example lakes rivers oceans aquifers reservoirs and groundwater. water pollution results when contaminants are introduced into these water bodies. in addition to damage to many species water pollution can also lead to water borne diseases for people. water pollution traditionally is attributed to four sources which provide the organization of this article water pollution can also be classified as surface water pollution or groundwater pollution. sources of water pollution are either point sources or non point sources. point sources have one identifiable cause such as a storm drain or a wastewater treatment plant. non point sources are more diffuse such as agricultural runoff. pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. supplying clean drinking water is an important ecosystem service provided by some freshwater systems but approximately million people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water because of pollution. a practical definition of water pollution is water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. therefore pollution is associated with concepts attributed to humans namely the negative alterations and the uses of the water body. water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. due to these contaminants it either does not support a human use such as drinking water or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities such as fish. agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution. the use of fertilizers leads to nutrient pollution in which excess nutrients usually caused by nitrogen or phosphorus containing compounds that are the main components. sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farm fields and pastures discharges from septic tanks and feedlots. in addition to plant focused agriculture fish farming is also a source of pollution. additionally ag runoff often contains high levels of pesticides. using the us as an example the main industrial consumers of water are power plants petroleum refineries iron and steel mills pulp and paper mills and food processing industries. some industries discharge nutrients which impose high bod. some wastes are persistent organic pollutants such as per and polyfluoroalkyl substances sewage typically consists of. water and. solids. globally about. billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of according to an estimate by the joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation. lack of access to sanitation often leads to water pollution e. g. via the practice of open defecation. simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events. when sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows. sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to eutrophication. it is a major source of phosphate for example. sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene cosmetics pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites even at very low concentrations hormones and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action can have an adverse impacts. water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide ranging consequences the environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products is being investigated since at least the s. ppcps include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. more than twenty million tons of ppcps are produced every year. the european union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be priority substances. the source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces sewage blackwater manure that has found its way into the water body. the cause for this can be lack of sanitation or poorly functioning on site sanitation systems sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows during storm events and intensive agriculture. pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include burkholderia pseudomallei cryptosporidium parvum giardia lamblia salmonella norovirus and other viruses parasitic worms including the schistosoma type. a study published in stated that polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed. million people. urban runoff is stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops roads and parking lots and reservoirs. often it is captured in large retaining ponds. it is subject to high suspended solids as well and elevated nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. thermal pollution sometimes called thermal enrichment is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature. thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence. thermal pollution unlike chemical pollution results in a change in the physical properties of water. a common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. the introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. it causes biological pollution. sources of surface water pollution can be grouped into two categories based on their origin point sources and nonpoint sources. point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single identifiable source such as a pipe or ditch. examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant a factory or a city storm drain. the u. s. clean water act defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes. the cwa definition of point source was amended in to include municipal storm sewer systems as well as industrial storm water such as from construction sites. groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater. this type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent contaminant or impurity in the groundwater in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution. pollution can occur from on site sanitation systems landfills effluent from wastewater treatment plants leaking sewers petrol filling stations or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture. pollution can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants such as arsenic or fluoride. using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods physical chemical and biological. some methods may be conducted in situ without sampling such as temperature. others involve collection of samples followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. standardized validated analytical test methods for water and wastewater samples have been published. common physical tests of water include temperature specific conductance or electrical conductance or conductivity solids concentrations and turbidity. water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. frequently used parameters that are quantified are ph biochemical oxygen demand chemical oxygen demand dissolved oxygen total hardness nutrients metals oil and grease total petroleum hydrocarbons surfactants and pesticides. the complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on site because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings. measurements commonly made on site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature ph dissolved oxygen conductivity oxygen reduction potential turbidity and secchi disk depth. sampling of water for physical or chemical testing can be done by several methods depending on the accuracy needed and the characteristics of the contaminant. sampling methods include for example simple random sampling stratified sampling systematic and grid sampling adaptive cluster sampling grab samples semi continuous monitoring and continuous passive sampling remote surveillance remote sensing and biomonitoring. the use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. the use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring. this refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment. biological testing involves the use of plant animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem. they are any biological species or group of species whose function population or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present. one example of a group of bio indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. such organisms can be monitored for changes that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries. for example water pollution in india and china is wide spread. about percent of the water in the cities of china is polluted. one aspect of environmental protection are mandatory regulations but they are only part of the solution. other important tools in pollution control include environmental education economic instruments market forces and stricter enforcements. standards can be precise or imprecise which would require the use of best available technology or best practicable environmental option. market based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges subsidies deposit or refund schemes the creation of a market in pollution credits and enforcement incentives. moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches integrated control measures trans boundary considerations complementary and supplementary control measures life cycle considerations the impacts of chemical mixtures. control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. the infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants. agricultural wastewater treatment for farms and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow. water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels. municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants decentralized wastewater systems nature based solutions or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. for example waste stabilization ponds are a low cost treatment option for sewage particularly for regions with warm climates. uv light can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds. the use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation. well designed and operated systems can remove percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage. some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. while such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants they can also result in large financial costs as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system. in the us cities with large combined systems have not pursued system wide separation projects due to the high cost but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches. in some cases municipalities have installed additional cso storage facilities or expanded sewage treatment capacity. agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals in fertilizer pesticides animal slurry crop residues or irrigation water. agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. it may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater. where land is available for ponds settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles. animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland. constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes. nonpoint source pollution includes sediment runoff nutrient runoff and pesticides. point source pollution includes animal wastes silage liquor milking parlour wastes slaughtering waste vegetable washing water and firewater. many farms generate nonpoint source pollution from surface runoff which is not controlled through a treatment plant. sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls such as mulching and hydroseeding and sediment controls such as sediment basins and silt fences. discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans and specially designed containers and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms. erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology also results in loss of sediment and potentially water pollution. effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of storm water as well as reducing pollutant discharges. local governments use a variety of storm water management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. these techniques called best management practices for water pollution in some countries may focus on water quantity control while others focus on improving water quality and some perform both functions. some examples for legislation to control water pollution are listed below categorieswater pollution is the contamination of water bodies usually as a result of human activities in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services that it would otherwise provide. water bodies include for example lakes rivers oceans aquifers reservoirs and groundwater. water pollution results when contaminants are introduced into these water bodies. in addition to damage to many species water pollution can also lead to water borne diseases for people. water pollution traditionally is attributed to four sources which provide the organization of this article water pollution can also be classified as surface water pollution or groundwater pollution. sources of water pollution are either point sources or non point sources. point sources have one identifiable cause such as a storm drain or a wastewater treatment plant. non point sources are more diffuse such as agricultural runoff. pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. supplying clean drinking water is an important ecosystem service provided by some freshwater systems but approximately million people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water because of pollution. a practical definition of water pollution is water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. therefore pollution is associated with concepts attributed to humans namely the negative alterations and the uses of the water body. water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. due to these contaminants it either does not support a human use such as drinking water or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities such as fish. agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution. the use of fertilizers leads to nutrient pollution in which excess nutrients usually caused by nitrogen or phosphorus containing compounds that are the main components. sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farm fields and pastures discharges from septic tanks and feedlots. in addition to plant focused agriculture fish farming is also a source of pollution. additionally ag runoff often contains high levels of pesticides. using the us as an example the main industrial consumers of water are power plants petroleum refineries iron and steel mills pulp and paper mills and food processing industries. some industries discharge nutrients which impose high bod. some wastes are persistent organic pollutants such as per and polyfluoroalkyl substances sewage typically consists of. water and. solids. globally about. billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of according to an estimate by the joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation. lack of access to sanitation often leads to water pollution e. g. via the practice of open defecation. simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events. when sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows. sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to eutrophication. it is a major source of phosphate for example. sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene cosmetics pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites even at very low concentrations hormones and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action can have an adverse impacts. water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide ranging consequences the environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products is being investigated since at least the s. ppcps include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. more than twenty million tons of ppcps are produced every year. the european union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be priority substances. the source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces sewage blackwater manure that has found its way into the water body. the cause for this can be lack of sanitation or poorly functioning on site sanitation systems sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows during storm events and intensive agriculture. pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include burkholderia pseudomallei cryptosporidium parvum giardia lamblia salmonella norovirus and other viruses parasitic worms including the schistosoma type. a study published in stated that polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed. million people. urban runoff is stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops roads and parking lots and reservoirs. often it is captured in large retaining ponds. it is subject to high suspended solids as well and elevated nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. thermal pollution sometimes called thermal enrichment is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature. thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence. thermal pollution unlike chemical pollution results in a change in the physical properties of water. a common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. the introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. it causes biological pollution. sources of surface water pollution can be grouped into two categories based on their origin point sources and nonpoint sources. point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single identifiable source such as a pipe or ditch. examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant a factory or a city storm drain. the u. s. clean water act defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes. the cwa definition of point source was amended in to include municipal storm sewer systems as well as industrial storm water such as from construction sites. groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater. this type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent contaminant or impurity in the groundwater in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution. pollution can occur from on site sanitation systems landfills effluent from wastewater treatment plants leaking sewers petrol filling stations or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture. pollution can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants such as arsenic or fluoride. using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods physical chemical and biological. some methods may be conducted in situ without sampling such as temperature. others involve collection of samples followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. standardized validated analytical test methods for water and wastewater samples have been published. common physical tests of water include temperature specific conductance or electrical conductance or conductivity solids concentrations and turbidity. water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. frequently used parameters that are quantified are ph biochemical oxygen demand chemical oxygen demand dissolved oxygen total hardness nutrients metals oil and grease total petroleum hydrocarbons surfactants and pesticides. the complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on site because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings. measurements commonly made on site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature ph dissolved oxygen conductivity oxygen reduction potential turbidity and secchi disk depth. sampling of water for physical or chemical testing can be done by several methods depending on the accuracy needed and the characteristics of the contaminant. sampling methods include for example simple random sampling stratified sampling systematic and grid sampling adaptive cluster sampling grab samples semi continuous monitoring and continuous passive sampling remote surveillance remote sensing and biomonitoring. the use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. the use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring. this refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment. biological testing involves the use of plant animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem. they are any biological species or group of species whose function population or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present. one example of a group of bio indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. such organisms can be monitored for changes that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries. for example water pollution in india and china is wide spread. about percent of the water in the cities of china is polluted. one aspect of environmental protection are mandatory regulations but they are only part of the solution. other important tools in pollution control include environmental education economic instruments market forces and stricter enforcements. standards can be precise or imprecise which would require the use of best available technology or best practicable environmental option. market based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges subsidies deposit or refund schemes the creation of a market in pollution credits and enforcement incentives. moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches integrated control measures trans boundary considerations complementary and supplementary control measures life cycle considerations the impacts of chemical mixtures. control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. the infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants. agricultural wastewater treatment for farms and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow. water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels. municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants decentralized wastewater systems nature based solutions or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. for example waste stabilization ponds are a low cost treatment option for sewage particularly for regions with warm climates. uv light can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds. the use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation. well designed and operated systems can remove percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage. some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. while such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants they can also result in large financial costs as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system. in the us cities with large combined systems have not pursued system wide separation projects due to the high cost but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches. in some cases municipalities have installed additional cso storage facilities or expanded sewage treatment capacity. agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals in fertilizer pesticides animal slurry crop residues or irrigation water. agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. it may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater. where land is available for ponds settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles. animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland. constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes. nonpoint source pollution includes sediment runoff nutrient runoff and pesticides. point source pollution includes animal wastes silage liquor milking parlour wastes slaughtering waste vegetable washing water and firewater. many farms generate nonpoint source pollution from surface runoff which is not controlled through a treatment plant. sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls such as mulching and hydroseeding and sediment controls such as sediment basins and silt fences. discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans and specially designed containers and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms. erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology also results in loss of sediment and potentially water pollution. effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of storm water as well as reducing pollutant discharges. local governments use a variety of storm water management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. these techniques called best management practices for water pollution in some countries may focus on water quantity control while others focus on improving water quality and some perform both functions. some examples for legislation to control water pollution are listed below water pollution is a major environmental issue in india. the largest source of water pollution in india is untreatedsewage. other sources of pollution include agricultural runoff and unregulated small scale industry. most rivers lakes and surface water in india are polluted due to industries untreated sewage and solid wastes. a study found that discharge of untreated sewage is the single most important source of pollution of surface and ground water in india. there is a large gap between generation and treatment of domestic waste water in india. the problem is not only that india lacks sufficient treatment capacity but also that the sewage treatment plants that exist do not operate and are not maintained. the majority of the government owned sewage treatment plants remain closed most of the time due to improper design or poor maintenance or lack of reliable electricity supply to operate the plants together with absentee employees and poor management. the waste water generated in these areas normally percolates into the soil or evaporates. the uncollected waste accumulates in the urban areas causing unhygienic conditions and releasing pollutants that leach into surface and groundwater. sewage discharged from cities towns and some villages is the predominant cause of water pollution in india. investment is needed to bridge the gap between the sewage india generates and its treatment capacity of sewage per day. major cities of india produce million litres per day of sewage but the urban sewage treatment capacity is only mld. a large number of indian rivers are severely polluted as a result of discharge of domestic sewage. the central pollution control board a ministry of environment forests government of india entity has established a national water quality monitoring network comprising monitoring stations in states and in union territories on various rivers and water bodies across the country. this effort monitors water quality year round. the monitoring network covers rivers lakes tanks ponds creeks canals drains and wells distributed across india. water samples are routinely analysed for parameters including dissolved oxygen bacteriological and other internationally established parameters for water quality. additionally trace metals parameters and pesticide residues are analysed. biomonitoring is also carried out on specific locations. the scientific analysis of water samples from to indicates that the organic and bacterial contamination is severe in water bodies of india. this is mainly due to discharge of domestic waste water in untreated form mostly from the urban centres of india. in the water quality monitoring found almost all rivers with high levels of bod. the worst pollution in decreasing order were found in river markanda followed by river kali river amlakhadi yamuna canal river yamuna at delhi and river betwa. for context a water sample with a day bod between and mg o l indicates a very clean water to mg o l indicates a moderately clean water to indicates borderline water and greater than mg o l indicates ecologically unsafe polluted water. the levels of bod are severe near the cities and major towns. in rural parts of india the river bod levels were sufficient to support aquatic life. rivers yamuna ganga gomti ghaghara chambal mahi vardha and godavari are amongst the other most coliform polluted water bodies in india. for context coliform must be below mpn ml preferably absent from water for it to be considered safe for general human use and for irrigation where coliform may cause disease outbreak from contaminated water in agriculture. in percent of water quality monitoring reported coliform concentrations above mpn ml. during percent of all water quality monitoring stations reported a total coliform levels exceeding those levels suggesting recent effort to add pollution control infrastructure and upgrade treatment plants in india may be reversing the water pollution trend. treatment of domestic sewage and subsequent utilization of treated sewage for irrigation can prevent pollution of water bodies reduce the demand for fresh water in the irrigation sector and become a resource for irrigation. since indian wastewater treatment plant market has been growing annually at the rate of to percent. the united states is the largest supplier of treatment equipment and supplies to india with percent market share of new installation. at that rate of expansion and assuming the government of india continues on its path of reform major investments in sewage treatment plants and electricity infrastructure development it was estimated india will nearly triple its water treatment capacity by and treatment capacity supply will match indias daily sewage water treatment requirements by about. water conservation in india is gaining pace. the ganga rejuvenation efforts by the union government the yamuna clean up are some of the government initiated efforts. the chennai river restoration trusts efforts to clean the cooum adyar rivers in chennai and civil society efforts spearheaded by organizations like environmentalist foundation of india to clean lakes and ponds in the country are seen as significant development towards water conservation. a joint study by pgimer and the punjab pollution control board in revealed that in villages along the nullah fluoride mercury beta endosulphan and heptachlor pesticide were more than permissible limit in ground and tap water. plus the water had high concentration of cod and bod ammonia phosphate chloride chromium arsenic and chlorpyrifos pesticide. the ground water also contains nickel and selenium while the tap water has high concentration of lead nickel and cadmium. flooding during monsoons worsens indias water pollution problem as it washes and moves solid waste and contaminated soils into its rivers and wetlands. the annual average precipitation in india is about billion cubic metres. from this with the state of indian infrastructure in the available water resource through the rivers is about billion cubic meters. accounting to uneven distribution of rain over the country each year water resources available for utilization including ground water is claimed to be about billion cubic meters. much of this water is unsafe because pollution degrades water quality. water pollution severely limits the amount of water available to indian consumers its industry and its agriculture. more than million people live along the river. an estimated persons ritually bath daily in the river which is considered holy by hindus. ganges river pollution is a major health risk. nrgba was established by the central government of india on february under section of the environment protection act. it also declared ganges as the national river of india. the chair includes the prime minister of india and chief ministers of states through which the ganges flows. by an estimate by delhis sacred yamuna river contained coliform bacteria per cc of water. a number of ngos pressure groups eco clubs as well as citizens movements have been active in their task to clean the river. even though india revised its national water policy in to encourage community participation and decentralize water management the countrys complex bureaucracy ensures that it remains a mere statement of intent. responsibility for managing water issues is fragmented among a dozen different ministries and departments without any coordination. the government bureaucracy and state run project department has failed to solve the problem despite having spent many years and million on this project. water pollution in the united states is a growing problem that became critical in the century with the development of mechanized agriculture mining and industry although laws and regulations introduced in the late century have improved water quality in many water bodies. extensive industrialization and rapid urban growth exacerbated water pollution as a lack of regulation allowed for discharges of sewage toxic chemicals nutrients and other pollutants into surface water. in the early century communities began to install drinking water treatment systems but control of the principal pollution sourcesdomestic sewage industry and agriculturewas not effectively addressed in the us until the later century. these pollution sources can affect both groundwater and surface water. multiple pollution incidents such as the kingston fossil plant coal fly ash slurry spill and the deepwater horizon oil spill have left lasting impacts on water quality ecosystems and public health in the united states. many solutions to water pollution in the united states can be implemented to curtail water pollution. this includes municipal wastewater treatment agricultural and industrial wastewater treatment erosion and sediment control and the control of urban runoff. the continued implementation of pollution prevention control and treatment measures are used to pursue the goal of maintaining water quality within levels specified in federal and state regulations. however many water bodies across the country continue to violate water quality standards in the century. water pollution was identified as a growing problem in the us by scientists government officials and the public in the century. many cities and towns piped their untreated domestic sewage into nearby waterways. wastewater discharged by factories mines and other businesses increased as the economy expanded. large cities and later smaller communities began to install drinking water treatment systems in the early century but sewage treatment plants were limited at that time and not very effective. effective control of sewage and industrial pollution was not comprehensively addressed until later in the century. agricultural pollution emerged as a growing problem in the century with the increased mechanization of agriculture and increasing use of chemicals. following the passage of thelean water act the levels of water pollution in us waterways generally have experienced a dramatic decrease with respect to sewage treatment and many types of industrial wastewater. however more than half of u. s. stream and river miles continue to violate federal water quality standards in the century. surveys of lakes ponds and reservoirs indicated that about percent were impaired and a little more than percent of the nation s coastlines and percent of the surveyed ocean and near coastal areas were also impaired. in a report on water quality in the united states in percent of assessed stream miles percent of assessed lake acres and percent of assessed bays and estuarine square miles were classified as polluted. agriculture industry urban runoff and other sources continue to discharge waste into surface waters nationwide. this poses huge environmental and health risks given that these water sources are used as drinking water and for agricultural use. while the cwa has made positive contributions to the state of surface water in the united states the law does not fully address all aspects of pollution. many think that congress should revise or expand the law to address these problems and gaps in regulation. although the cwa has been effective in controlling point source pollution it has not been as effective with nonpoint sources. despite the negative health and ecosystem impacts of water pollution solutions exist that are able to treat and decrease pollution levels in water bodies. surface water consists of all forms of visible water sources such as oceans lakes and rivers. currently a significant percentage of surface freshwater sources are polluted in the united states. this poses a huge threat to american water sources because over of water used in the united states is from these freshwater sources. a majority of freshwater contamination cases are a result of nutrient pollution which is the result of farm waste and fertilizer entering the water source and resulting in toxic zones with depleted oxygen levels. groundwater is rainfall that collects in porous spaces deep underground which are called aquifers. humans can access the water that collects in an aquifer by building wells to pump the water to the surface for use. about of drinking water in america comes from groundwater sources. when contaminants enter aquifers the pollution spreads eliminating the potential to use the aquifer for drinking water. groundwater contamination is often the result of chemicals that seep through the soil and into the water supply such as pesticides and fertilizers. other causes of contamination in groundwater includes gasoline oil road salts septic tank waste or leakage from landfills. point source pollution occurs when water pollution contamination comes from a single source. point sources could include leaking septic tanks oil spills dumping of waste or wastewater treatment facilities. in order to prevent point source pollution from occurring the clean water act regulates what can be discharged into a water body by requiring each facility to obtain a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit. nonpoint source pollution occurs when the contamination derives from multiple different sources. this type of pollution is very challenging to manage given that the original source may be difficult to identify. nonpoint source pollution is the most common type of pollution because as rainfall runs off of land on its path to different water sources it becomes contaminated by pollutants from the surrounding area. these sources include agriculture related pollutants urban runoff or drainage. the cwa does not authorize the issuance of npdes permits for nonpoint sources trans boundary water pollution occurs when pollution in one country s waters spreads and damages another country s environment or water supply. trans boundary pollution can travel through rivers or ocean currents. historically municipal sewage was a major contributor of water pollution across the united states. the lack of proper treatment of sewage resulted in many contaminated water bodies across the county. domestic sewage became a widespread problem with the onset of the industrial revolution in the century population growth and increasing urbanization. through the early century most communities had no sewage treatment plants or waste disposal sites. some cities built sewer pipes which carried their sewage to a nearby river or coastal area but lacked any treatment of the wastes instead depositing the sewage directly into the water. the first wastewater treatment plants were built in the late and early centuries in the united states and typically did not fully treat the wastes. the extensive construction of new and upgraded sewage treatment systems following the passage of thelean water act has greatly reduced municipal discharges. since the s secondary treatment has been the national standard for municipalities. some individual systems continue to cause localized water quality problems due to outdated or leaking piping and collection systems leading to combined sewer overflows and sanitary sewer overflows. poor upkeep of sewer infrastructure results in contamination from leaks and contributed to a rating from the american society of civil engineers of a d grade for americas wastewater infrastructure. while all domestic wastewater is now treated nationwide leaks and spills of municipal sewage pose a significant problem because wastewater carries diseases like salmonella hepatitis and many other infectious diseases that roughly sickens about. million americans every year. water research during the late s and s indicated that stormwater runoff was a significant cause of water quality impairment in many parts of the us. increased land development throughout the countryin both cities and suburbshas led to an increase in impervious surfaces which generates increased surface runoff during wet weather. the development of new roads and smooth surfaces have contributed to polluted waters easily flowing into nearby rivers lakes and the oceans across the usa. these paved surfaces and roads restrict water from soaking into the ground and instead allows water to freely flow across pavements while picking up chemicals fertilizers pesticides and many other pollutants that causes water pollution in the bodies of water in the usa. early indications of pollution from industrial waste in the united states existed since the s increasing as the industrial revolution expanded throughout the united states and its environmental impacts were observed more frequently. industrial wastes contribute toxic pollutants and chemicals and can have detrimental ecosystem and public health impacts if discharged directly into surface water. historical accounts of early industrial activity in the us provide a general description of the kinds of waste generated. mining operations iron forges and blast furnaces were some of the early industries in the u. s. that generated waste. in the late and early centuries wastes from mining operations entered rivers and streams and iron bloomeries and furnaces used water for cooling. these industries were relatively small businesses generating small amounts of product and the wastes they discharged to rivers and streams were proportionately dilute. however as factories grew in the century so did the quantity of pollution produced. in the early century the introduction of steam engines in both the mining and manufacturing sectors greatly expanded productivity and increased use of the engines generated larger volumes of heated water. the productivity gains along with the introduction of railroads in the s and swhich increased the overall demand for coal and mineralsled to additional generation of wastes. the volumes and concentrations of industrial wastes increased significantly in the mid century in multiple business sectors including mining. mining wastes were increasing not only from coal and mineral mines in the east and south but from mining of gold silver and other metals in the newly developing west. the onset of the second industrial revolution in the mid to late century introduced new heavy industries in the us generating larger volumes and new kinds of wastes. these industries included industrial expansion continued into the century including large scale expansion of paper products manufacturing which produced additional types and quantities of wastes. today industrial pollution is caused by discharges and emissions from manufacturing plants in certain industries which continues to pollute surface waters nationwide. many manufacturing processes generate wastewater contributing to the water pollution found in rivers lakes and oceans. in the u. s. environmental protection agency found that fossil fuel power stations particularly coal fired plants were the largest contributors of industrial water pollution. epa found instances where power plants discharged toxic pollutants such as mercury arsenic and lead into surface waters. although many industrial facilities have added or expanded their wastewater treatment systems to comply with the cwa certain industrial sectors and facilities have not addressed all components in their discharges and continue to contribute significant quantities of pollutants to surface waters in the us. based on a report of industrial and commercial facilities subject to the epa toxics release inventory system discharges of toxic pollutants in totaled about million pounds a decrease of million pounds from mostly due to reduced nitrate discharges. discharges and chemicals from agriculture greatly contributes to water pollution in the us as rainwater flows through fields and into bodies of water. the application of chemical fertilizers collection of animal manure and use of chemicals used by farmers results in nitrogen and phosphorus. when washed away from farming fields nitrogen and phosphorus found in fertilizers can cause eutrophication of water bodies. eutrophication results in algal blooms which deplete oxygen in bodies of water resulting in dead zones where life can no longer be sustained. excessive use or improper use of fertilizers pesticides and various types of chemicals during farming contribute to water pollution and are currently the third largest source for water pollution in lakes second largest source of water pollution in wetlands and a major contributor to pollution in estuaries and ground water. other activities that contribute to water pollution include municipal wastewater is composed of human waste and other residential waste streams. in the united states approximately billion gallons of wastewater are collected every day and sent to sewage treatment plants. wastewater is collected through combined sewers which are used for sanitary waste and stormwater runoff or in separate sanitary sewers. sewage treatment plants include physical removal processes such as screens and settling tanks and biological processes to remove organic matter and pathogens from water. treatment plants have strict permit requirements to ensure that their discharges will not cause harm to the environment or public health. some plants have enhanced treatment processes to control nutrient pollution before discharge. agricultural run off is one of the leading causes of water pollution in the united states. funding from clean water grants are available to farmers to install projects to help control agricultural pollution before it enters water sources. methods to minimize and contain water pollution from agriculture in the united states include watershed efforts nutrient management cover crops buffers management of livestock waste and drainage management. buffers are small strips of land covered in plants that are able to remove pollutants such as nitrogen phosphorus and sediment prior to discharge in a water body. both buffers and crop covers are used to remove these pollutants from agricultural runoff. erosion and sediment controls are techniques used to mitigate sediment pollution in waterways. the most common and efficient control method on agricultural land is crop management which increases soil cover and stabilizes slopes. without proper soil stabilization techniques rainfall can cause large quantities of sediment to be washed away into waterways creating issues with sunlight penetration and visibility. typical preventive measures for construction sites include erosion control matting and mulching and installation of silt fences to trap sediment not captured by the erosion controls. urban areas affect water quality by increasing the volume of run off and pollutant loads. one solution to decrease run off is constructing new surfaces with pervious pavers that allow rainwater to pass through the surface to groundwater aquifers and decrease the quantity of urban run off. additionally proper use and storage of household chemicals are critical to decrease incidences of spills that pollute local waterways. the deepwater horizon oil spill is considered to be the largest marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry. the incident began on april when a semi submersible bp oil rig exploded in the gulf of mexico about miles off of the coast of louisiana. the explosion led to discharges between to barrels of oil per day. it took responders days to stop the spill at which point the rig had leaked an estimated. million barrels of oil into the gulf. over miles of shoreline on the gulf of mexico from texas to florida were impacted by the deepwater horizon spill. of the crew members present during the deepwater horizon oil spill died and were seriously injured. in addition the frequency of hurricanes in the gulf makes the effects of long term exposure on humans more applicable as these storms are capable of carrying crude oil over miles of ocean towards the shore. according to a research article from lsu damages to those living in the presence of crude oil the past years are likely permanent as chronic exposure leads to increased cancer risks cardiovascular issues and respiratory problems. oil exposure and its respiratory effects were also analyzed in a study on the coast guard personnel deployed to help clean up the spill. the article has. of responders stating they were exposed to crude oil and. stating they were exposed to oil dispersants. of the nearly personnel who completed the survey. experienced coughing. experienced shortness of breath and. experienced wheezing. the study also found that exposure to both oil and oil dispersants presented associations that were much stronger than oil alone for the different respiratory symptoms. the northeast gulf of mexico shoreline contains about percent of the coastal and freshwater marshes in the united states. a marsh environment tends to have standing water making it among the most sensitive habitats to oil spills. without the natural cleaning mechanism that flowing water provides oil is able to coat marsh vegetation for longer periods of time ruining nurseries that then impact a host of interconnected species. the gulf of mexico is also home to species of marine mammals. of these up to percent of all kemp s ridley sea turtles present during the spill ended up dying and the louisiana bottlenose dolphin ended up facing a percent decline in population. however because the bp oil spill occurred miles from any land it wasn t as damaging to ecosystems along the shore as other oil spills. however habitats along the shore were still exposed through balls of tar that would clump together and wash up on beaches impacting local wildlife. also the consequences that drifting plumes of oil had on the deep sea ecosystem is relatively unknown. in december the u. s. filed a complaint in district court against bp and several other defendants associated with the spill. the complaint resulted in a record setting settlement enforcing a. billion clean water act penalty on bp exploration production and up to. billion in natural resource damages. however by bp had successfully recuperated most of the billion lost in market value after the spill. this recovery was attributed to the company s inclination to continue exploring new oil resources despite the accident. between and bp s gulf of mexico oil rigs doubled and they began investing billion towards opportunities in alaska in. on the other hand a article from npr exhibited how fishing cities along the gulf coast are still feeling harmful effects of the oil spill. in an interview with an oysterman from alabama he states business is still struggling... because of the lack of oyster production... i place the blame for that on the oil spill. the fisherman goes on to describe how the oyster reefs off of louisiana have not been producing like they should since the spill. water pollution in the city of woburn massachusetts gained public recognition in the lawsuit filed by the families of children in woburn who had died from leukemia in unusually high numbers. the families attributed the leukemia to the town s polluted drinking water which had been contaminated over years of industry most notably the toxic compounds used by leather factories in the area. the martin county coal slurry spill occurred on october when a coal slurry broke into an abandoned mine and sent an estimated million gallons of slurry into the tug fork river. the spill polluted miles of the big sandy river and a water supply for over residents. on december a dike ruptured on the kingston fossil plant in roane county tennessee and released. billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry into the emory river. it was the largest fly ash release and worst coal ash related disaster in u. s. history. on august workers on the gold king mine in silverton colorado released million gallons of toxic wastewater when attempting to add a tap to the tailing pond for the mine. the wastewater carried unsafe levels of heavy metals with some parts of the river testing for hundreds of times over their limits. during the late century there was little federal government attention paid to what were considered to be local environmental and health problems. the only federal legislation to address water pollution during this era was the rivers and harbors act of. in the law congress prohibited the dumping of refuse debris that interfered with navigationbut other forms of pollution were not addressed. in to address oil spills in harbors congress passed the oil pollution act. the law provided for penalties in the event of oil spills but they were applicable only to vessels in coastal waters. in the s and s state water boards were created to monitor some aspects of water quality. even prior to the clean water act the united states public health service investigated reports of water borne disease. in the s the public health service tested drinking water quality at at public establishments in door county wisconsin having their own wells. the clean water act of was the first act of its kind to establish a broad regulatory framework for improving water quality in the united states. the cwa defines procedures for pollution control and developing criteria and standards for pollutants in surface water. the law authorizes the environmental protection agency to regulate surface water pollution in the united states in partnership with state agencies. prior to it was legal to discharge wastewater to surface waters without testing for or removing water pollutants. the cwa was amended in and to adjust the federal proportion of construction grant funding for local governments regulate municipal storm sewer discharges and to later establish the clean water state revolving fund. the fund provides low interest loans to improve municipal sewage treatment systems and finance other water quality improvements. under the cwa the national pollution discharge elimination system regulates permits for discharges into water bodies. the epa regulations require each facility to apply for a specific permit for its wastewater discharges and consequently require that each facility treat its wastewater. in addition to effluent limitations the permits include monitoring and reporting requirements which are used by epa and states to enforce the limitations. however over fifty percent of the rivers in the united states still violate pollution standards published by the states. cwa and npdes form the backbone of regulation for controlling surface water pollution in the united states. additional regulation exists on a state by state basis allowing for more stringent regulation for protected bodies of water. additional regulation may be enacted to limit pollution that comes from non point sources such as agriculture. in many watersheds non point sources are the principal cause of noncompliance with water quality standards. some economists questioned whether the law was delivering the promised results of cleaner rivers and lakes and whether benefits exceeded the costs to society. the united states government has spent over one trillion dollars trying to combat water pollution. in the cwa congress had declared that the nations waters were to be free of pollutants by only eleven years after enactment. in general water quality has improved nationwide since but not all pollution has been eliminated. between and there was a percent increase in the number of waterways that are safe for fishing. data supporting this finding is limited only percent of the united states waterways had been tested for contamination. categoriespollution is the introduction of contaminants into the natural environment that cause adverse change. pollution can take the form of chemical substances or energy such as noise heat or light. pollutants the components of pollution can be either foreign substances energies or naturally occurring contaminants. pollution is often classed as point source or nonpoint source pollution. in pollution killed million people worldwide. major forms of pollution include air pollution light pollution litter noise pollution plastic pollution soil contamination radioactive contamination thermal pollution visual pollution and water pollution. the major forms of pollution are listed below along with the particular contaminant relevant to each of them the major forms of pollution are also listed below in the pollution navigation box a pollutant is a waste material that pollutes air water or soil. three factors determine the severity of a pollutant its chemical nature the concentration the area affected and the persistence. air pollution comes from both natural and human made sources. however globally human made pollutants from combustion construction mining agriculture and warfare are increasingly significant in the air pollution equation. motor vehicle emissions are one of the leading causes of air pollution. china united states russia india mexico and japan are the world leaders in air pollution emissions. principal stationary pollution sources include chemical plants coal fired power plants oil refineries petrochemical plants nuclear waste disposal activity incinerators large livestock farms pvc factories metals production factories plastics factories and other heavy industry. agricultural air pollution comes from contemporary practices which include clear felling and burning of natural vegetation as well as spraying of pesticides and herbicidesabout million metric tons of hazardous wastes are generated each year. the united states alone produces about million metric tons. americans constitute less than of the worlds population but produce roughly of the worlds co and generate approximately of worlds waste. in china overtook the united states as the worlds biggest producer of co while still far behind based on per capita pollution. some of the more common soil contaminants are chlorinated hydrocarbons heavy metals mtbe zinc arsenic and benzene. in a series of press reports culminating in a book called fateful harvest unveiled a widespread practice of recycling industrial byproducts into fertilizer resulting in the contamination of the soil with various metals. ordinary municipal landfills are the source of many chemical substances entering the soil environment emanating from the wide variety of refuse accepted especially substances illegally discarded there or from pre landfills that may have been subject to little control in the u. s. or eu. there have also been some unusual releases of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins commonly called dioxins for simplicity such as tcdd. pollution can also be the consequence of a natural disaster. for example hurricanes often involve water contamination from sewage and petrochemical spills from ruptured boats or automobiles. larger scale and environmental damage is not uncommon when coastal oil rigs or refineries are involved. some sources of pollution such as nuclear power plants or oil tankers can produce widespread and potentially hazardous releases when accidents occur. in the case of noise pollution the dominant source class is the motor vehicle producing about ninety percent of all unwanted noise worldwide. carbon dioxide while vital for photosynthesis is sometimes referred to as pollution because raised levels of the gas in the atmosphere are affecting the earths climate. disruption of the environment can also highlight the connection between areas of pollution that would normally be classified separately such as those of water and air. recent studies have investigated the potential for long term rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide to cause slight but critical increases in the acidity of ocean waters and the possible effects of this on marine ecosystems. in february a report by the intergovernmental panel on climate change representing the work of scientists economists and policymakers from more than countries confirmed that humans have been the primary cause of global warming since. humans have ways to cut greenhouse gas emissions and avoid the consequences of global warming a major climate report concluded. but to change the climate the transition from fossil fuels like coal and oil needs to occur within decades according to the final report this year from the uns intergovernmental panel on climate change. adverse air quality can kill many organisms including humans. ozone pollution can cause respiratory disease cardiovascular disease throat inflammation chest pain and congestion. water pollution causes approximately deaths per day mostly due to contamination of drinking water by untreated sewage in developing countries. an estimated million indians have no access to a proper toilet over ten million people in india fell ill with waterborne illnesses in and people died most of them children. nearly million chinese lack access to safe drinking water. a analysis estimated that. million people died prematurely each year in china because of air pollution. the high smog levels china has been facing for a long time can do damage to civilians bodies and cause different diseases. the who estimated in that air pollution causes half a million deaths per year in india. studies have estimated that the number of people killed annually in the united states could be over. oil spills can cause skin irritations and rashes. noise pollution induces hearing loss high blood pressure stress and sleep disturbance. mercury has been linked to developmental deficits in children and neurologic symptoms. older people are majorly exposed to diseases induced by air pollution. those with heart or lung disorders are at additional risk. children and infants are also at serious risk. lead and other heavy metals have been shown to cause neurological problems. chemical and radioactive substances can cause cancer and as well as birth defects. an october study by the lancet commission on pollution and health found that global pollution specifically toxic air water soils and workplaces kills nine million people annually which is triple the number of deaths caused by aids tuberculosis and malaria combined and times higher than deaths caused by wars and other forms of human violence. the study concluded that pollution is one of the great existential challenges of the anthropocene era. pollution endangers the stability of the earth s support systems and threatens the continuing survival of human societies. pollution has been found to be present widely in the environment. there are a number of effects of this the toxicology and environmental health information program at the united states national library of medicine maintains a comprehensive toxicology and environmental health web site that includes access to resources produced by tehip and by other government agencies and organizations. this web site includes links to databases bibliographies tutorials and other scientific and consumer oriented resources. tehip also is responsible for the toxicology data network an integrated system of toxicology and environmental health databases that are available free of charge on the web. toxmap is a geographic information system that is part of toxnet. toxmap uses maps of the united states to help users visually explore data from the united states environmental protection agencys toxics release inventory and superfund basic research programs. a study found that exposure to pollution causes an increase in violent crime. a paper linked pollution to adverse school outcomes for children. a number of studies show that pollution has an adverse effect on the productivity of both indoor and outdoor workers. to protect the environment from the adverse effects of pollution many nations worldwide have enacted legislation to regulate various types of pollution as well as to mitigate the adverse effects of pollution. pollution control is a term used in environmental management. it means the control of emissions and effluents into air water or soil. without pollution control the waste products from overconsumption heating agriculture mining manufacturing transportation and other human activities whether they accumulate or disperse will degrade the environment. in the hierarchy of controls pollution prevention and waste minimization are more desirable than pollution control. in the field of land development low impact development is a similar technique for the prevention of urban runoff. pollution has a cost. manufacturing activities that cause air pollution impose health and clean up costs on the whole of society. a manufacturing activity that causes air pollution is an example of a negative externality in production. a negative externality in production occurs when a firm s production reduces the well being of others who are not compensated by the firm. for example if a laundry firm exists near a polluting steel manufacturing firm there will be increased costs for the laundry firm because of the dirt and smoke produced by the steel manufacturing firm. if external costs exist such as those created by pollution the manufacturer will choose to produce more of the product than would be produced if the manufacturer were required to pay all associated environmental costs. because responsibility or consequence for self directed action lies partly outside the self an element of externalization is involved. if there are external benefits such as in public safety less of the good may be produced than would be the case if the producer were to receive payment for the external benefits to others. however goods and services that involve negative externalities in production such as those that produce pollution tend to be over produced and underpriced since the externality is not being priced into the market. pollution can also create costs for the firms producing the pollution. sometimes firms choose or are forced by regulation to reduce the amount of pollution that they are producing. the associated costs of doing this are called abatement costs or marginal abatement costs if measured by each additional unit. in pollution abatement capital expenditures and operating costs in the us amounted to nearly billion. the pure earth an international non for profit organization dedicated to eliminating life threatening pollution in the developing world issues an annual list of some of the worlds most polluting industries. below is the list for a report by the institute for agriculture and trade policy and grain says that the meat and dairy industries are poised to surpass the oil industry as the worlds worst polluters. pure earth issues an annual list of some of the worlds worst polluted places. below is the list for society derives some indirect utility from pollution otherwise there would be no incentive to pollute. this utility comes from the consumption of goods and services that create pollution. therefore it is important that policymakers attempt to balance these indirect benefits with the costs of pollution in order to achieve an efficient outcome. it is possible to use environmental economics to determine which level of pollution is deemed the social optimum. for economists pollution is an external cost and occurs only when one or more individuals suffer a loss of welfare however there exists a socially optimal level of pollution at which welfare is maximized. this is because consumers derive utility from the good or service manufactured which will outweigh the social cost of pollution until a certain point. at this point the damage of one extra unit of pollution to society the marginal cost of pollution is exactly equal to the marginal benefit of consuming one more unit of the good or service. in markets with pollution or other negative externalities in production the free market equilibrium will not account for the costs of pollution on society. if the social costs of pollution are higher than the private costs incurred by the firm then the true supply curve will be higher. the point at which the social marginal cost and market demand intersect gives the socially optimal level of pollution. at this point the quantity will be lower and the price will be higher in comparison to the free market equilibrium. therefore the free market outcome could be considered a market failure because it does not maximize efficiency. this model can be used as a basis to evaluate different methods of internalizing the externality. some examples include tariffs a carbon tax and cap and trade systems. the earliest precursor of pollution generated by life forms would have been a natural function of their existence. the attendant consequences on viability and population levels fell within the sphere of natural selection. these would have included the demise of a population locally or ultimately species extinction. processes that were untenable would have resulted in a new balance brought about by changes and adaptations. at the extremes for any form of life consideration of pollution is superseded by that of survival. for humankind the factor of technology is a distinguishing and critical consideration both as an enabler and an additional source of byproducts. short of survival human concerns include the range from quality of life to health hazards. since science holds experimental demonstration to be definitive modern treatment of toxicity or environmental harm involves defining a level at which an effect is observable. common examples of fields where practical measurement is crucial include automobile emissions control industrial exposure pels toxicology and medicine. the solution to pollution is dilution is a dictum which summarizes a traditional approach to pollution management whereby sufficiently diluted pollution is not harmful. it is well suited to some other modern locally scoped applications such as laboratory safety procedure and hazardous material release emergency management. but it assumes that the diluent is in virtually unlimited supply for the application or that resulting dilutions are acceptable in all cases. such simple treatment for environmental pollution on a wider scale might have had greater merit in earlier centuries when physical survival was often the highest imperative human population and densities were lower technologies were simpler and their byproducts more benign. but these are often no longer the case. furthermore advances have enabled measurement of concentrations not possible before. the use of statistical methods in evaluating outcomes has given currency to the principle of probable harm in cases where assessment is warranted but resorting to deterministic models is impractical or infeasible. in addition consideration of the environment beyond direct impact on human beings has gained prominence. yet in the absence of a superseding principle this older approach predominates practices throughout the world. it is the basis by which to gauge concentrations of effluent for legal release exceeding which penalties are assessed or restrictions applied. one such superseding principle is contained in modern hazardous waste laws in developed countries as the process of diluting hazardous waste to make it non hazardous is usually a regulated treatment process. migration from pollution dilution to elimination in many cases can be confronted by challenging economical and technological barriers. air pollution has always accompanied civilizations. pollution started from prehistoric times when man created the first fires. according to a article in the journal science soot found on ceilings of prehistoric caves provides ample evidence of the high levels of pollution that was associated with inadequate ventilation of open fires. metal forging appears to be a key turning point in the creation of significant air pollution levels outside the home. core samples of glaciers in greenland indicate increases in pollution associated with greek roman and chinese metal production. the burning of coal and wood and the presence of many horses in concentrated areas made the cities the primary sources of pollution. king edward i of england banned the burning of sea coal by proclamation in london in after its smoke became a problem the fuel was so common in england that this earliest of names for it was acquired because it could be carted away from some shores by the wheelbarrow. it was the industrial revolution that gave birth to environmental pollution as we know it today. london also recorded one of the earlier extreme cases of water quality problems with the great stink on the thames of which led to construction of the london sewerage system soon afterward. pollution issues escalated as population growth far exceeded viability of neighborhoods to handle their waste problem. reformers began to demand sewer systems and clean water. in the sanitary conditions in berlin were among the worst in europe. august bebel recalled conditions before a modern sewer system was built in the late s waste water from the houses collected in the gutters running alongside the curbs and emitted a truly fearsome smell. there were no public toilets in the streets or squares. visitors especially women often became desperate when nature called. in the public buildings the sanitary facilities were unbelievably primitive.... as a metropolis berlin did not emerge from a state of barbarism into civilization until after. the primitive conditions were intolerable for a world national capital and the imperial german government brought in its scientists engineers and urban planners to not only solve the deficiencies but to forge berlin as the worlds model city. a british expert in concluded that berlin represented the most complete application of science order and method of public life adding it is a marvel of civic administration the most modern and most perfectly organized city that there is. the emergence of great factories and consumption of immense quantities of coal gave rise to unprecedented air pollution and the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste. chicago and cincinnati were the first two american cities to enact laws ensuring cleaner air in. pollution became a major issue in the united states in the early twentieth century as progressive reformers took issue with air pollution caused by coal burning water pollution caused by bad sanitation and street pollution caused by the million horses who worked in american cities in generating large quantities of urine and manure. as historian martin melosi notes the generation that first saw automobiles replacing the horses saw cars as miracles of cleanliness. by the s however automobile caused smog was a major issue in los angeles. other cities followed around the country until early in the century when the short lived office of air pollution was created under the department of the interior. extreme smog events were experienced by the cities of los angeles and donora pennsylvania in the late s serving as another public reminder. air pollution would continue to be a problem in england especially later during the industrial revolution and extending into the recent past with the great smog of. awareness of atmospheric pollution spread widely after world war ii with fears triggered by reports of radioactive fallout from atomic warfare and testing. then a non nuclear event the great smog of in london killed at least people. this prompted some of the first major modern environmental legislation the clean air act of. pollution began to draw major public attention in the united states between the mid s and early s when congress passed the noise control act the clean air act the clean water act and the national environmental policy act. severe incidents of pollution helped increase consciousness. pcb dumping in the hudson river resulted in a ban by the epa on consumption of its fish in. national news stories in the late s especially the long term dioxin contamination at love canal starting in and uncontrolled dumping in valley of the drums led to the superfund legislation of. the pollution of industrial land gave rise to the name brownfield a term now common in city planning. the development of nuclear science introduced radioactive contamination which can remain lethally radioactive for hundreds of thousands of years. lake karachay named by the worldwatch institute as the most polluted spot on earth served as a disposal site for the soviet union throughout the s and s. chelyabinsk russia is considered the most polluted place on the planet. nuclear weapons continued to be tested in the cold war especially in the earlier stages of their development. the toll on the worst affected populations and the growth since then in understanding about the critical threat to human health posed by radioactivity has also been a prohibitive complication associated with nuclear power. though extreme care is practiced in that industry the potential for disaster suggested by incidents such as those at three mile island chernobyl and fukushima pose a lingering specter of public mistrust. worldwide publicity has been intense on those disasters. widespread support for test ban treaties has ended almost all nuclear testing in the atmosphere. international catastrophes such as the wreck of the amoco cadiz oil tanker off the coast of brittany in and the bhopal disaster in have demonstrated the universality of such events and the scale on which efforts to address them needed to engage. the borderless nature of atmosphere and oceans inevitably resulted in the implication of pollution on a planetary level with the issue of global warming. most recently the term persistent organic pollutant has come to describe a group of chemicals such as pbdes and pfcs among others. though their effects remain somewhat less well understood owing to a lack of experimental data they have been detected in various ecological habitats far removed from industrial activity such as the arctic demonstrating diffusion and bioaccumulation after only a relatively brief period of widespread use. a much more recently discovered problem is the great pacific garbage patch a huge concentration of plastics chemical sludge and other debris which has been collected into a large area of the pacific ocean by the north pacific gyre. this is a less well known pollution problem than the others described above but nonetheless has multiple and serious consequences such as increasing wildlife mortality the spread of invasive species and human ingestion of toxic chemicals. organizations such as gyres have researched the pollution and along with artists like marina debris are working toward publicizing the issue. pollution introduced by light at night is becoming a global problem more severe in urban centres but nonetheless contaminating also large territories far away from towns. growing evidence of local and global pollution and an increasingly informed public over time have given rise to environmentalism and the environmental movement which generally seek to limit human impact on the environment. air pollutionsoil contaminationwater pollutionotherplastic pollution in ghana plastic pollution on the remote island of maui hawaiicategoriesplastic pollution is the accumulation of plastic objects and particles in the earths environment that adversely affects wildlife wildlife habitat and humans. plastics that act as pollutants are categorized by size into micro meso or macro debris. plastics are inexpensive and durable making them very adaptable for different uses as a result humans produce a lot of plastic. however the chemical structure of most plastics renders them resistant to many natural processes of degradation and as a result they are slow to degrade. together these two factors allow large volumes of plastic to enter the environment as mismanaged waste and for it to persist in the ecosystem. plastic pollution can afflict land waterways and oceans. it is estimated that. to. million tonnes of plastic waste enters the ocean from coastal communities each year. it is estimated that there is a stock of million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of with an assumption that. of global plastics produced from to has entered the ocean and has accumulated there. some researchers suggest that by there could be more plastic than fish in the oceans by weight. living organisms particularly marine animals can be harmed either by mechanical effects such as entanglement in plastic objects problems related to ingestion of plastic waste or through exposure to chemicals within plastics that interfere with their physiology. degraded plastic waste can directly affect humans through both direct consumption indirect consumption and disruption of various hormonal mechanisms. as of million tonnes of plastic is produced each year in asia where china is the worlds largest producer. from the s up to an estimated. billion tonnes of plastic has been produced worldwide of which an estimated has been recycled and another has been incinerated. this large amount of plastic waste enters the environment with studies suggesting that the bodies of of seabirds contain plastic debris. in some areas there have been significant efforts to reduce the prominence of free range plastic pollution through reducing plastic consumption litter cleanup and promoting plastic recycling. as of the global mass of produced plastic exceeds the biomass of all land and marine animals combined. a may amendment to the basel convention regulates the exportation importation of plastic waste largely intended to prevent the shipping of plastic waste from developed countries to developing countries. nearly all countries have joined this agreement. the trade in plastic waste has been identified as a main culprit of marine litter. countries importing the waste plastics often lack the capacity to process all the material. as a result the united nations has imposed a ban on waste plastic trade unless it meets certain criteria. there are three major forms of plastic that contribute to plastic pollution micro macro and mega plastics. mega and micro plastics have accumulated in highest densities in the northern hemisphere concentrated around urban centers and water fronts. plastic can be found off the coast of some islands because of currents carrying the debris. both mega and macro plastics are found in packaging footwear and other domestic items that have been washed off of ships or discarded in landfills. fishing related items are more likely to be found around remote islands. these may also be referred to as micro meso and macro debris. plastic debris is categorized as either primary or secondary. primary plastics are in their original form when collected. examples of these would be bottle caps cigarette butts and microbeads. secondary plastics on the other hand account for smaller plastics that have resulted from the degradation of primary plastics. microdebris are plastic pieces between mm and mm in size. plastic debris that starts off as meso or macrodebris can become microdebris through degradation and collisions that break it down into smaller pieces. microdebris is more commonly referred to as nurdles. nurdles are recycled to make new plastic items but they easily end up released into the environment during production because of their small size. they often end up in ocean waters through rivers and streams. microdebris that come from cleaning and cosmetic products are also referred to as scrubbers. because microdebris and scrubbers are so small in size filter feeding organisms often consume them. nurdles enter the ocean by means of spills during transportation or from land based sources. the ocean conservancy reported that china indonesia philippines thailand and vietnam dump more plastic in the sea than all other countries combined. it is estimated that of the plastics in the ocean are nurdles making them one of the most common types of plastic pollution along with plastic bags and food containers. these micro plastics can accumulate in the oceans and allow for the accumulation of persistent bio accumulating toxins such as bisphenol a polystyrene ddt and pcbs which are hydrophobic in nature and can cause adverse health affects. a study by richard thompson from the university of plymouth uk found a great amount of microdebris on the beaches and waters in europe the americas australia africa and antarctica. thompson and his associates found that plastic pellets from both domestic and industrial sources were being broken down into much smaller plastic pieces some having a diameter smaller than human hair. if not ingested this microdebris floats instead of being absorbed into the marine environment. thompson predicts there may be plastic items per square kilometre of sea surface and plastic particles per square kilometre of seabed. international pellet watch collected samples of polythene pellets from beaches from countries which were then analysed for organic micro pollutants. it was found that pellets found on beaches in the u. s. vietnam and southern africa contained compounds from pesticides suggesting a high use of pesticides in the areas. in scientists created what may be the first scientific estimate of how much microplastic currently resides in earths seafloor after investigating six areas of km depth km off the australian coast. they found the highly variable microplastic counts to be proportionate to plastic on the surface and the angle of the seafloor slope. by averaging the microplastic mass per cm they estimated that earths seafloor contains million tons of microplastic about double the amount they estimated based on data from earlier studies despite calling both estimates conservative as coastal areas are known to contain much more microplastic. these estimates are about one to two times the amount of plastic thought per jambeck et al. to currently enter the oceans annually. plastic debris is categorized as macrodebris when it is larger than mm. these include items such as plastic grocery bags. macrodebris are often found in ocean waters and can have a serious impact on the native organisms. fishing nets have been prime pollutants. even after they have been abandoned they continue to trap marine organisms and other plastic debris. eventually these abandoned nets become too difficult to remove from the water because they become too heavy having grown in weight up to tonnes. plastics themselves contribute to approximately of discarded waste. many kinds of plastics exist depending on their precursors and the method for their polymerization. depending on their chemical composition plastics and resins have varying properties related to contaminant absorption and adsorption. polymer degradation takes much longer as a result of saline environments and the cooling effect of the sea. these factors contribute to the persistence of plastic debris in certain environments. recent studies have shown that plastics in the ocean decompose faster than was once thought due to exposure to sun rain and other environmental conditions resulting in the release of toxic chemicals such as bisphenol a. however due to the increased volume of plastics in the ocean decomposition has slowed down. the marine conservancy has predicted the decomposition rates of several plastic products. it is estimated that a foam plastic cup will take years a plastic beverage holder will take years a disposable nappy will take years and fishing line will take years to degrade. it was estimated that global production of plastics is approximately mt yr. their abundance has been found to transport persistent organic pollutants also known as pops. these pollutants have been linked to an increased distribution of algae associated with red tides. in the group break free from plastic organized over volunteers in countries to collect and identify plastic waste. these volunteers collected over plastic bags sachets and plastic bottles as reported by the guardian. nearly half of the items were identifiable by consumer brands. the most common brands were coca cola nestl and pepsico. according to the global campaign coordinator for the project emma priestland in the only way to solve the problem is stopping production of single use plastic and using reusable products instead. china is the biggest consumer of single use plastics. coca cola answered that more than of our portfolio comes in refillable or fountain packaging they are decreasing the amount of plastic in secondary packaging. nestl responded that of their packaging and of their plastic packaging can be reused or recycled and by they want to make it. by that year they want to reduce the consumption of virgin plastic by one third. pepsico responded that they want to decrease virgin plastic in our beverage business by by and also expanding reuse and refill practices what should prevent billion single use bottles by. top mismanaged plastic waste pollutersin approximate million tonnes of plastics wind up in the oceans every year out of which the is from the following countries china is the most mismanaged plastic waste polluter leaving in the sea the. of the world total second indonesia with the. third philippines with. fourth vietnam with. fifth sri lanka. sixth thailand with. seventh egypt with. eighth malaysia with. ninth nigeria with. tenth bangladesh with. eleventh south africa with. twelfth india with. thirteenth algeria with. fourteenth turkey with. fifteenth pakistan with. sixteenth brazil with. seventeenth myanmar with. eighteenth morocco with. nineteenth north korea with. twentieth united states with.. the rest of worlds countries combined wind up the. of the mismanaged plastic waste in the oceans according to a study published by science jambeck et al. in a new study revised the potential u. s. contribution to mismanaged plastic. it estimated an annual.. metric tons was mismanaged in the countries to which the u. s. exported plastics for recycling and an. and. metric tons was illegally dumped in the u. s. itself. thus the amount of u. s. generated plastic estimated to enter the ocean environment could range as high as. mt placing the u. s. behind indonesia and india in oceanic pollution or as low as. mt placing the u. s. behind indonesia india thailand china brazil philippines egypt japan russia and vietnam. the authors noted that sincehina ceased importing plastics for recycling and since international treaties restricted the export of plastics for recycling. all the european union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list. a study calculated the mismanaged plastic waste in millions of metric tonnes per year around million tonnes of plastic waste is generated each year around the world between. million and. million tonnes is dumped into the sea. about of the plastic waste in the ocean comes from the following top countries. the table below list the top plastic waste polluting countries in according to a study published by science jambeck et al. all the european union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list. in a study published by environmental science technology schmidt et al calculated that rivers two in africa and eight in asia transport of the global plastics load into the sea.. the caribbean islands are the biggest plastic polluters per capita in the world. trinidad and tobago produces. kilograms of waste per capita per day is the biggest plastic polluter per capita in the world. at least. kg per person per day of trinidad and tobagos plastic debris end up in the ocean or for example saint lucia which generates more than four times the amount of plastic waste per capita as china and is responsible for. times more improperly disposed plastic waste per capita than china. of the top thirty global polluters per capita ten are from the caribbean region. these are trinidad and tobago antigua and barbuda saint kitts and nevis guyana barbados saint lucia bahamas grenada anguilla and aruba according to a set of studies summarized by forbes. the distribution of plastic debris is highly variable as a result of certain factors such as wind and ocean currents coastline geography urban areas and trade routes. human population in certain areas also plays a large role in this. plastics are more likely to be found in enclosed regions such as the caribbean. it serves as a means of distribution of organisms to remote coasts that are not their native environments. this could potentially increase the variability and dispersal of organisms in specific areas that are less biologically diverse. plastics can also be used as vectors for chemical contaminants such as persistent organic pollutants and heavy metals. in a new report plastic and climate was published. according to the report in production and incineration of plastic will contribute greenhouse gases in the equivalent of million tonnes of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. in current trend annual emissions from these sources will grow to. billion tonnes by. by plastic could emit billion tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions as much as percent of the earths remaining carbon budget. by it will emit billion tonnes more than half of the carbon budget. those are emission from production transportation incineration but there are also releases of methane and effects on phytoplankton. plastic pollution on land poses a threat to the plants and animals including humans who are based on the land. estimates of the amount of plastic concentration on land are between four and twenty three times that of the ocean. the amount of plastic poised on the land is greater and more concentrated than that in the water. mismanaged plastic waste ranges from percent in east asia and pacific to one percent in north america. the percentage of mismanaged plastic waste reaching the ocean annually and thus becoming plastic marine debris is between one third and one half the total mismanaged waste for that year. chlorinated plastic can release harmful chemicals into the surrounding soil which can then seep into groundwater or other surrounding water sources and also the ecosystem of the world. this can cause serious harm to the species that drink the water. a study found that of tap water samples taken around the world contained plastic pollutants. this was the first study to focus on global drinking water pollution with plastics and showed that with a contamination rate of tap water in the united states was the most polluted followed by lebanon and india. european countries such as the united kingdom germany and france had the lowest contamination rate though still as high as. this means that people may be ingesting between and microparticles of plastic from tap water per year. the analysis found particles of more than. microns in size which is times bigger than a nanometer. it is currently unclear if this contamination is affecting human health but if the water is also found to contain nano particle pollutants there could be adverse impacts on human well being according to scientists associated with the study. however plastic tap water pollution remains under studied as are the links of how pollution transfers between humans air water and soil. plastic waste can clog storm drains and such clogging can increase flood damage particularly in urban areas. for example in bangkok flood risk increases substantially because of plastic waste clogging the already overburdened sewer system. marine plastic pollution is a type of marine pollution by plastics ranging in size from large original material such as bottles and bags down to microplastics formed from the fragmentation of plastic material. marine debris is mainly discarded human rubbish which floats on or is suspended in the ocean. eighty percent of marine debris is plastic. microplastics and nanoplastics result from the breakdown or photodegradation of plastic waste in surface waters rivers or oceans. it is estimated that there is a stock of million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of assuming that. of global plastics produced from to has entered the ocean and has accumulated there. the united nations ocean conference estimated that the oceans might contain more weight in plastics than fish by the yearompounds that are used in manufacturing pollute the environment by releasing chemicals into the air and water. some compounds that are used in plastics such as phthalates bisphenol a polybrominated diphenyl ether are under close statute and might be very hurtful. even though these compounds are unsafe they have been used in the manufacturing of food packaging medical devices flooring materials bottles perfumes cosmetics and much more. the large dosage of these compounds are hazardous to humans destroying the endocrine system. bra imitates the females hormone called estrogen. pbd destroys and causes damage to thyroid hormones which are vital hormone glands that play a major role in the metabolism growth and development of the human body. although the level of exposure to these chemicals varies depending on age and geography most humans experience simultaneous exposure to many of these chemicals. average levels of daily exposure are below the levels deemed to be unsafe but more research needs to be done on the effects of low dose exposure on humans. a lot is unknown on how severely humans are physically affected by these chemicals. some of the chemicals used in plastic production can cause dermatitis upon contact with human skin. in many plastics these toxic chemicals are only used in trace amounts but significant testing is often required to ensure that the toxic elements are contained within the plastic by inert material or polymer. children and women during their reproduction age are at most at risk and more prone to damaging their immune as well as their reproductive system from these hormone disrupting chemicals. it can also affect humans because it may create an eyesore that interferes with enjoyment of the natural environment. due to the pervasiveness of plastic products most of the human population is constantly exposed to the chemical components of plastics. of adults in the united states have had detectable levels of bpa in their urine. exposure to chemicals such as bpa have been correlated with disruptions in fertility reproduction sexual maturation and other health effects. specific phthalates have also resulted in similar biological effects. bisphenol a affects gene expression related to the thyroid hormone axis which affects biological functions such as metabolism and development. bpa can decrease thyroid hormone receptor activity by increasing tr transcriptional corepressor activity. this then decreases the level of thyroid hormone binding proteins that bind to triiodothyronine. by affecting the thyroid hormone axis bpa exposure can lead to hypothyroidism. bpa can disrupt normal physiological levels of sex hormones. it does this by binding to globulins that normally bind to sex hormones such as androgens and estrogens leading to the disruption of the balance between the two. bpa can also affect the metabolism or the catabolism of sex hormones. it often acts as an antiandrogen or as an estrogen which can cause disruptions in gonadal development and sperm production. efforts to reduce the use of plastics to promote plastic recycling and to reduce mismanaged plastic waste or plastic pollution have occurred or are ongoing. the first scientific review in the professional academic literature about global plastic pollution in general found that the rational response to the global threat would be reductions in consumption of virgin plastic materials along with internationally coordinated strategies for waste management such as banning export of plastic waste unless it leads to better recycling and describes the state of knowledge about poorly reversible impacts which are one of the rationales for its reduction. some supermarkets charge their customers for plastic bags and in some places more efficient reusable or biodegradable materials are being used in place of plastics. some communities and businesses have put a ban on some commonly used plastic items such as bottled water and plastic bags. some non governmental organizations have launched voluntary plastic reduction schemes like certificates that can be adapted by restaurants to be recognized as eco friendly among customers. in january a global alliance to end plastic waste was created by companies in the plastics industry. the alliance aims to clean the environment from existing waste and increase recycling but it does not mention reduction in plastic production as one of its targets. the use of biodegradable plastics has many advantages and disadvantages. biodegradables are biopolymers that degrade in industrial composters. biodegradables do not degrade as efficiently in domestic composters and during this slower process methane gas may be emitted. there are also other types of degradable materials that are not considered to be biopolymers because they are oil based similar to other conventional plastics. these plastics are made to be more degradable through the use of different additives which help them degrade when exposed to uv rays or other physical stressors. yet biodegradation promoting additives for polymers have been shown not to significantly increase biodegradation. although biodegradable and degradable plastics have helped reduce plastic pollution there are some drawbacks. one issue concerning both types of plastics is that they do not break down very efficiently in natural environments. there degradable plastics that are oil based may break down into smaller fractions at which point they do not degrade further. a parliamentary committee in the united kingdom also found that compostable and biodegradable plastics could add to marine pollution because there is a lack of infrastructure to deal with these new types of plastic as well as a lack of understanding about them on the part of consumers. for example these plastics need to be sent to industrial composting facilities to degrade properly but no adequate system exists to make sure waste reaches these facilities. the committee thus recommended to reduce the amount of plastic used rather than introducing new types of it to the market. up to of used plastic medical equipment is incinerated rather than deposited in a landfill as a precautionary measure to lessen the transmission of disease. this has allowed for a large decrease in the amount of plastic waste that stems from medical equipment. at a large scale plastics paper and other materials provides waste to energy plants with useful fuel. about of total produced plastic has been incinerated. many studies have been done concerning the gaseous emissions that result from the incineration process. incinerated plastics release a number of toxins in the burning process including dioxins furans mercury and polychlorinated biphenyls. when burned outside of facilities designed to collect or process the toxins this can have significant health effects and create significant air pollution. agencies such as the us environmental protection agency and us food and drug administration often do not assess the safety of new chemicals until after a negative side effect is shown. once they suspect a chemical may be toxic it is studied to determine the human reference dose which is determined to be the lowest observable adverse effect level. during these studies a high dose is tested to see if it causes any adverse health effects and if it does not lower doses are considered to be safe as well. this does not take into account the fact that with some chemicals found in plastics such as bpa lower doses can have a discernible effect. even with this often complex evaluation process policies have been put into place in order to help alleviate plastic pollution and its effects. government regulations have been implemented that ban some chemicals from being used in specific plastic products. in canada the united states and the european union bpa has been banned from being incorporated in the production of baby bottles and childrens cups due to health concerns and the higher vulnerability of younger children to the effects of bpa. taxes have been established in order to discourage specific ways of managing plastic waste. the landfill tax for example creates an incentive to choose to recycle plastics rather than contain them in landfills by making the latter more expensive. there has also been a standardization of the types of plastics that can be considered compostable. the european norm en which was set by the european committee for standardization lists the standards that plastics must meet in terms of compostability and biodegradability in order to officially be labeled as compostable. given the significant threat that oceans face the european investment bank group aims to increase its funding and advisory assistance for ocean cleanup. for example the clean oceans initiative was established in. the european investment bank the german development bank and the french development agency agreed to invest a total of billion under the coi from october to october in initiatives aimed at reducing pollution discharge into the oceans with a special focus on plastics. major plastic producers continue to lobby governments to refrain from imposing restrictions on plastic production and to advocate for voluntary corporate targets to reduce new plastic output. however the worlds top plastic producers including the coca cola company nestle sa and pepsico have been failing to meet even their own minimum targets for virgin plastic use. there have been several international covenants which address marine plastic pollution such as the convention on the prevention of marine pollution by dumping of wastes and other matter the international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships and the honolulu strategy there is nothing around plastics which infiltrate the ocean from the land. in countries agreed to limit the amount of plastic waste that rich countries export to poorer countries using rules from the basel convention. however during january the first month that the agreement was in effect trade data showed that overall scrap exports actually increased. some academics and ngos believe that a legally binding international treaty to deal with plastic pollution is necessary. they think this because plastic pollution is an international problem moving between maritime borders and also because they believe there needs to be a cap on plastic production. lobbyists were hoping that unea would lead to a plastics treaty but the session ended without a legally binding agreement. the canadian federal government formed a current institution that protects marine areas this includes the mitigation of plastic pollution. in canada adopted legislation for oceans management and passed the oceans act. federal governance regional governance and aboriginal peoples are the actors involved in the process of decision making and implementation of the decision. the regional governance bodies are federal provincial and territorial government agencies that hold responsibilities of the marine environment. aboriginal peoples in canada have treaty and non treaty rights related to ocean activities. according to the canadian government they respect these rights and work with aboriginal groups in oceans management activities. with the oceans act made legal canada made a commitment to conserve and protect the oceans. the ocean acts underlying principle is sustainable development precautionary and integrated management approach to ensure that there is a comprehensive understanding in protecting marine areas. in the integrated management approach the oceans act designates federal responsibility to the minister of fisheries and oceans canada for any new and emerging ocean related activities. the act encourages collaboration and coordination within the government that unifies interested parties. moreover the oceans act engages any canadians who are interested in being informed of the decision making regarding ocean environment. in federal organizations developed the federal marine protected areas strategy. this strategy is a collaborative approach implemented by fisheries and oceans canada parks canada and environment canada to plan and manage federal marine protected areas. the federal marine protected areas work with aboriginal groups industries academia environmental groups and ngos to strengthen marine protected areas. the federal marine protected areas network consists of three core programs marine protected areas marine wildlife areas and national marine conservation areas. the mpa is a program to be noted because it is significant in protecting ecosystems from the effects of industrial activities. the mpa guiding principles are integrated management ecosystem based management approach adaptive management approach precautionary principle and flexible management approach. all five guiding principles are used collectively and simultaneously to collaborate and respect legislative mandates of individual departments to use scientific knowledge and traditional ecological knowledge to manage human activities to monitor and report on programs to meet conservation objectives of mpas to use best available information in the absence of scientific certainty and to maintain a balance between conservation needs and sustainable development objectives. inanadas government officially recognize plastic as toxic material what creates the possibility to limit its consumption in different ways. the two common forms of waste collection include curbside collection and the use of drop off recycling centers. about percent of the population in the united states have access to curbside and drop off recycling centers. in curbside collection which is available to about percent of the united states population people place designated plastics in a special bin to be picked up by a public or private hauling company. most curbside programs collect more than one type of plastic resin usually both pete and hdpe. at drop off recycling centers which are available to percent of the united states population people take their recyclables to a centrally located facility. once collected the plastics are delivered to a materials recovery facility or handler for sorting into single resin streams to increase product value. the sorted plastics are then baled to reduce shipping costs to reclaimers. there are varying rates of recycling per type of plastic and in the overall plastic recycling rate was approximately. in the united states. approximately. million tonnes of plastics were recycled in the u. s. in while. million tonnes plastic were dumped in landfills the same year. some plastics are recycled more than others in about. percent of hdpe bottles and. percent of pet bottles and jars were recycled. in may a new service model called loop to collect packaging from consumers and reuse it began to function in the new york region us. consumers drop packages in special shipping totes and then a pick up collect them. partners include procter gamble nestl pepsico unilever mars petcare the clorox company the body shop coca cola mondelz danone and other firms. it has begun with several thousand households but there are on the waiting list. the target of the service is not only stop single use plastic but to stop single use generally by recycling consumer product containers of various materials. the organization the ocean cleanup is trying to collect plastic waste from the oceans by nets. there are concerns from harm to some forms of sea organisms especially neuston. in the european union adopted a directive requiring a reduction in the consumption of single use plastic bags per person to by the year and to by the year. in april the eu adopted a further directive banning almost all types of single use plastic except bottles from the beginning of the yearhina is the biggest consumer of single use plastics. inhina published a plan to cut of plastic waste in years. as part of this plan single use plastic bags and straws will be bannedthe government of india decided to ban single use plastics and take a number of measures to recycle and reuse plastic from october the ministry of drinking water and sanitation government of india has requested various governmental departments to avoid the use of plastic bottles to provide drinking water during governmental meetings etc. and to instead make arrangements for providing drinking water that do not generate plastic waste. the state of sikkim has restricted the usage of plastic water bottles and styrofoam products. the state of bihar has banned the usage of plastic water bottles in governmental meetings. the national games of india organised in thiruvananthapuram was associated with green protocols. this was initiated by suchitwa mission that aimed for zero waste venues. to make the event disposable free there was ban on the usage of disposable water bottles. the event witnessed the usage of reusable tableware and stainless steel tumblers. athletes were provided with refillable steel flasks. it is estimated that these green practices stopped the generation of tonnes of disposable waste. the city of bangalore in banned the plastic for all purpose other than for few special cases like milk delivery etc. the state of maharashtra india effected the maharashtra plastic and thermocol products ban june subjecting plastic users to fines and potential imprisonment for repeat offenders. in july albania became the first country in europe to ban lightweight plastic bags. albanias environment minister blendi klosi said that businesses importing producing or trading plastic bags less than microns in thickness risk facing fines between million to. million lek. in bali a pair of two sisters melati and isabel wijsen have gone through efforts to ban plastic bags in. their organization bye bye plastic bags has spread to locations around the world. in washington university in st. louis became the first university in the united states to ban the sale of plastic single use water bottles. in district of columbia required all businesses that sell food or alcohol to charge an additional cents for each carryout plastic or paper bag. in and kauai maui and hawaii prohibit non biodegradable plastic bags at checkout as well as paper bags containing less than percent recycled material. in honolulu was the last major county approving the ban. in california prohibited large stores from providing plastic bags and if so a charge of. per bag and has to meet certain criteria. in illinois adopted the legislation and established recycle thin film friday in effort toe reclaim used thin film plastic bags and encourage reusable bags. in the new york banned single use plastic bags and introduced a cent fee for using single use paper bags. the ban will enter into force in. this will not only reduce plastic bag usage in new york state but also eliminate million barrels of oil used to make plastic bags used by the state each year. the state of maine ban styrofoam containers in may. in the giant eagle retailer became the first big us retailer that committed to completely phase out plastic by. the first step stop using single use plastic bags will begun to be implemented already on january. in delaware maine oregon and vermont enacted on legislation. vermont also restricted single use straws and polystyrene containers. in connecticut imposed a. charge on single use plastic bags at point of sale and is going to ban them on july. in the house of representatives of nigeria banned the production import and usage of plastic bags in the country. in israel cities eilat and herzliya decided to ban the usage of single use plastic bags and cutlery on the beaches. in tel aviv joined them banning also the sale of single use plastic on the beaches. in january the iceland supermarket chain which specializes in frozen foods pledged to eliminate or drastically reduce all plastic packaging for its store brand products by. as of communities achieved the title of plastic free community in united kingdom want to achieve it. after schoolgirls ella and caitlin launched a petition about it burger king and mcdonalds in the united kingdom and ireland pledged to stop sending plastic toys with their meals. mcdonalds pledged to do it from the year. mcdonalds also pledged to use a paper wrap for it meals and books that will be sent with the meals. the transmission will begin already in march. kenyain august kenya has one of the worlds harshest plastic bag bans. fines of or up to four years in jail to anyone that was caught producing selling or using a plastic bag. vanuatuon july vanuatu s independence day made an announcement of stepping towards the beginning of not using plastic bags and bottles. making it one of the first pacific nations to do so and will start banning the importation of single use plastic bottles and bags. taiwanin february taiwan restricted the use of single use plastic cups straws utensils and bags the ban will also include an extra charge for plastic bags and updates their recycling regulations and aiming by it would be completely enforced. the country announced a ban on many types of hard to recycle single use plastic by the ten corporations that produce the most plastic on the planet the coca cola company colgate palmolive danone mars incorporated mondelz international nestl pepsico perfetti van melle procter gamble and unilever formed a well financed network that has sabotaged for decades government and community efforts to address the plastic pollution crisis according to a detailed investigative report by the changing markets foundation. the investigation documents how these companies delay and derail legislation so that they can continue to inundate consumers with disposable plastic packaging. these large plastic producers have exploited public fears of the covid pandemic to work toward delaying and reversing existing regulation of plastic disposal. big ten plastic producers have advanced voluntary commitments for plastic waste disposal as a stratagem to deter governments from imposing additional regulations. as early as the early s petrochemical industry leaders understood that the vast majority of plastic they produced would never be recycled. for example an april report written by industry scientists for industry executive states that sorting the hundreds of different kinds plastic is infeasible and cost prohibitive. by the late s industry leaders also knew that the public must be kept feeling good about purchasing plastic products if their industry was to continue to prosper and needed to quell proposed legislation to regulate the plastic being sold. so the industry launched a million year corporate propaganda campaign targeting the american public with the message that plastic can be and is being recycled and lobbied american municipalities to launch expensive plastic waste collection programs and lobbied u. s. states to require the labeling of plastic products and containers with recycling symbols. they were confident however that the recycling initiatives would not end up recovering and reusing plastic in amounts anywhere near sufficient to hurt their profits in selling new virgin plastic products because they understood that the recycling efforts that they were promoting were likely to fail. industry leaders more recently have planned recycling of the plastic they produce by calling for more efficient collection sorting and processing. in the earth day network partnered with keep america beautiful and national cleanup day for the inaugural nationwide earth day cleanup. cleanups were held in all states five us territories sites and had more than volunteers. earth day is the anniversary of earth day. celebrations will include activities such as the great global cleanup citizen science advocacy education and art. this earth day aims to educate and mobilize more than one billion people to grow and support the next generation of environmental activists with a major focus on plastic wasteevery year june is observed as world environment day to raise awareness and increase government action on the pressing issue. in india was host to the world environment day and the theme was beat plastic pollution with a focus on single use or disposable plastic. the ministry of environment forest and climate change of india invited people to take care of their social responsibility and urged them to take up green good deeds in everyday life. several states presented plans to ban plastic or drastically reduce their use. on april in order to create awareness artist maria cristina finucci founded the garbage patch state at unesco headquarters in paris france in front of director general irina bokova. this was the first of a series of events under the patronage of unesco and of the italian ministry of the environment. categoriessoil contamination soil pollution or land pollution as a part of land degradation is caused by the presence of xenobiotic chemicals or other alteration in the natural soil environment. it is typically caused by industrial activity agricultural chemicals or improper disposal of waste. the most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons pyrene solvents pesticides lead and other heavy metals. contamination is correlated with the degree of industrialization and intensity of chemical substance. the concern over soil contamination stems primarily from health risks from direct contact with the contaminated soil vapour from the contaminants or from secondary contamination of water supplies within and underlying the soil. mapping of contaminated soil sites and the resulting cleanups are time consuming and expensive tasks requiring extensive amounts of geology hydrology chemistry computer modeling skills and gis in environmental contamination as well as an appreciation of the history of industrial chemistry. in north america and western europe the extent of contaminated land is best known with many of countries in these areas having a legal framework to identify and deal with this environmental problem. developing countries tend to be less tightly regulated despite some of them having undergone significant industrialization. soil pollution can be caused by the following the most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons solvents pesticides lead and other heavy metals. any activity that leads to other forms of soil degradation may indirectly worsen the contamination effects in that soil remediation becomes more tedious. historical deposition of coal ash used for residential commercial and industrial heating as well as for industrial processes such as ore smelting were a common source of contamination in areas that were industrialized before about. coal naturally concentrates lead and zinc during its formation as well as other heavy metals to a lesser degree. when the coal is burned most of these metals become concentrated in the ash. coal ash and slag may contain sufficient lead to qualify as a characteristic hazardous waste defined in the us as containing more than mg l of extractable lead using the tclp procedure. in addition to lead coal ash typically contains variable but significant concentrations of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons anthracene benzofluoranthene benzofluoranthene benzopyrene indenopyrene phenanthrene anthracene and others. these pahs are known human carcinogens and the acceptable concentrations of them in soil are typically around mg kg. coal ash and slag can be recognised by the presence of off white grains in soil gray heterogeneous soil or bubbly vesicular pebble sized grains. treated sewage sludge known in the industry as biosolids has become controversial as a fertilizer. as it is the byproduct of sewage treatment it generally contains more contaminants such as organisms pesticides and heavy metals than other soil. in the european union the urban waste water treatment directive allows sewage sludge to be sprayed onto land. the volume is expected to double to tons of dry solids in. this has good agricultural properties due to the high nitrogen and phosphate content. in wet weight was sprayed onto. of the land however this is expected to rise fold by. advocates say there is a need to control this so that pathogenic microorganisms do not get into water courses and to ensure that there is no accumulation of heavy metals in the top soil. a pesticide is a substance used to kill a pest. a pesticide may be a chemical substance biological agent antimicrobial disinfectant or device used against any pest. pests include insects plant pathogens weeds mollusks birds mammals fish nematodes and microbes that compete with humans for food destroy property spread or are a vector for disease or cause a nuisance. although there are benefits to the use of pesticides there are also drawbacks such as potential toxicity to humans and other organisms. herbicides are used to kill weeds especially on pavements and railways. they are similar to auxins and most are biodegradable by soil bacteria. however one group derived from trinitrotoluene have the impurity dioxin which is very toxic and causes fatality even in low concentrations. another herbicide is paraquat. it is highly toxic but it rapidly degrades in soil due to the action of bacteria and does not kill soil fauna. insecticides are used to rid farms of pests which damage crops. the insects damage not only standing crops but also stored ones and in the tropics it is reckoned that one third of the total production is lost during food storage. as with fungicides the first insecticides used in the nineteenth century were inorganic e. g. paris green and other compounds of arsenic. nicotine has also been used since the late eighteenth century. there are now two main groups of synthetic insecticides. organochlorines include ddt aldrin dieldrin and bhc. they are cheap to produce potent and persistent. ddt was used on a massive scale from the s with a peak of tonnes used. then usage fell as the harmful environmental effects were realized. it was found worldwide in fish and birds and was even discovered in the snow in the antarctic. it is only slightly soluble in water but is very soluble in the bloodstream. it affects the nervous and endocrine systems and causes the eggshells of birds to lack calcium causing them to be easily breakable. it is thought to be responsible for the decline of the numbers of birds of prey like ospreys and peregrine falcons in the s they are now recovering. as well as increased concentration via the food chain it is known to enter via permeable membranes so fish get it through their gills. as it has low water solubility it tends to stay at the water surface so organisms that live there are most affected. ddt found in fish that formed part of the human food chain caused concern but the levels found in the liver kidney and brain tissues was less than ppm and in fat was ppm which was below the level likely to cause harm. however ddt was banned in the uk and the united states to stop the further buildup of it in the food chain. u. s. manufacturers continued to sell ddt to developing countries who could not afford the expensive replacement chemicals and who did not have such stringent regulations governing the use of pesticides... organophosphates e. g. parathion methyl parathion and about other insecticides are available nationally. parathion is highly toxic methyl parathion is less so and malathion is generally considered safe as it has low toxicity and is rapidly broken down in the mammalian liver. this group works by preventing normal nerve transmission as cholinesterase is prevented from breaking down the transmitter substance acetylcholine resulting in uncontrolled muscle movements. the disposal of munitions and a lack of care in manufacture of munitions caused by the urgency of production can contaminate soil for extended periods. there is little published evidence on this type of contamination largely because of restrictions placed by governments of many countries on the publication of material related to war effort. however mustard gas stored during world war ii has contaminated some sites for up to years and the testing of anthrax as a potential biological weapon contaminated the whole island of gruinard. contaminated or polluted soil directly affects human health through direct contact with soil or via inhalation of soil contaminants which have vaporized potentially greater threats are posed by the infiltration of soil contamination into groundwater aquifers used for human consumption sometimes in areas apparently far removed from any apparent source of above ground contamination. this tends to result in the development of pollution related diseases. health consequences from exposure to soil contamination vary greatly depending on pollutant type pathway of attack and vulnerability of the exposed population. chronic exposure to chromium lead and other metals petroleum solvents and many pesticide and herbicide formulations can be carcinogenic can cause congenital disorders or can cause other chronic health conditions. industrial or man made concentrations of naturally occurring substances such as nitrate and ammonia associated with livestock manure from agricultural operations have also been identified as health hazards in soil and groundwater. chronic exposure to benzene at sufficient concentrations is known to be associated with higher incidence of leukemia. mercury and cyclodienes are known to induce higher incidences of kidney damage and some irreversible diseases. pcbs and cyclodienes are linked to liver toxicity. organophosphates and carbonates can induce a chain of responses leading to neuromuscular blockage. many chlorinated solvents induce liver changes kidney changes and depression of the central nervous system. there is an entire spectrum of further health effects such as headache nausea fatigue eye irritation and skin rash for the above cited and other chemicals. at sufficient dosages a large number of soil contaminants can cause death by exposure via direct contact inhalation or ingestion of contaminants in groundwater contaminated through soil. the scottish government has commissioned the institute of occupational medicine to undertake a review of methods to assess risk to human health from contaminated land. the overall aim of the project is to work up guidance that should be useful to scottish local authorities in assessing whether sites represent a significant possibility of significant harm to human health. it is envisaged that the output of the project will be a short document providing high level guidance on health risk assessment with reference to existing published guidance and methodologies that have been identified as being particularly relevant and helpful. the project will examine how policy guidelines have been developed for determining the acceptability of risks to human health and propose an approach for assessing what constitutes unacceptable risk in line with the criteria for sposh as defined in the legislation and the scottish statutory guidance. not unexpectedly soil contaminants can have significant deleterious consequences for ecosystems. there are radical soil chemistry changes which can arise from the presence of many hazardous chemicals even at low concentration of the contaminant species. these changes can manifest in the alteration of metabolism of endemic microorganisms and arthropods resident in a given soil environment. the result can be virtual eradication of some of the primary food chain which in turn could have major consequences for predator or consumer species. even if the chemical effect on lower life forms is small the lower pyramid levels of the food chain may ingest alien chemicals which normally become more concentrated for each consuming rung of the food chain. many of these effects are now well known such as the concentration of persistent ddt materials for avian consumers leading to weakening of egg shells increased chick mortality and potential extinction of species. effects occur to agricultural lands which have certain types of soil contamination. contaminants typically alter plant metabolism often causing a reduction in crop yields. this has a secondary effect upon soil conservation since the languishing crops can not shield the earths soil from erosion. some of these chemical contaminants have long half lives and in other cases derivative chemicals are formed from decay of primary soil contaminants. cleanup or environmental remediation is analyzed by environmental scientists who utilize field measurement of soil chemicals and also apply computer models for analyzing transport and fate of soil chemicals. various technologies have been developed for remediation of oil contaminated soil and sediments there are several principal strategies for remediation various national standards for concentrations of particular contaminants include the united states epa region preliminary remediation goals the u. s. epa region risk based concentrations and national environment protection council of australia guideline on investigation levels in soil and groundwater. the immense and sustained growth of the peoples republic of china since the s has exacted a price from the land in increased soil pollution. the ministry of ecology and environment believes it to be a threat to the environment to food safety and to sustainable agriculture. according to a scientific sampling million mu of chinas cultivated land have been polluted with contaminated water being used to irrigate a further. million mu and another million mu covered or destroyed by solid waste. in total the area accounts for one tenth of chinas cultivatable land and is mostly in economically developed areas. an estimated million tonnes of grain are contaminated by heavy metals every year causing direct losses of billion yuan. according to the received data from member states in the european union the number of estimated potential contaminated sites is more than. million and the identified contaminated sites around thousand. municipal and industrial wastes contribute most to soil contamination followed by the industrial commercial sector. mineral oil and heavy metals are the main contaminants contributing around to soil contamination. in terms of budget the management of contaminated sites is estimated to cost around billion euros annually. generic guidance commonly used in the united kingdom are the soil guideline values published by the department for environment food and rural affairs and the environment agency. these are screening values that demonstrate the minimal acceptable level of a substance. above this there can be no assurances in terms of significant risk of harm to human health. these have been derived using the contaminated land exposure assessment model. certain input parameters such as health criteria values age and land use are fed into clea uk to obtain a probabilistic output. guidance by the inter departmental committee for the redevelopment of contaminated land has been formally withdrawn by defra for use as a prescriptive document to determine the potential need for remediation or further assessment. the clea model published by defra and the environment agency in march sets a framework for the appropriate assessment of risks to human health from contaminated land as required by part iia of the environmental protection act. as part of this framework generic soil guideline values have currently been derived for ten contaminants to be used as intervention values. these values should not be considered as remedial targets but values above which further detailed assessment should be considered see dutch standards. three sets of clea sgvs have been produced for three different land uses namely it is intended that the sgvs replace the former icrcl values. the clea sgvs relate to assessing chronic risks to human health and do not apply to the protection of ground workers during construction or other potential receptors such as groundwater buildings plants or other ecosystems. the clea sgvs are not directly applicable to a site completely covered in hardstanding as there is no direct exposure route to contaminated soils. to date the first ten of fifty five contaminant sgvs have been published for the following arsenic cadmium chromium lead inorganic mercury nickel selenium ethyl benzene phenol and toluene. draft sgvs for benzene naphthalene and xylene have been produced but their publication is on hold. toxicological data has been published for each of these contaminants as well as for benzopyrene benzene dioxins furans and dioxin like pcbs naphthalene vinyl chloride tetrachloroethane and tetrachloroethane trichloroethane tetrachloroethene carbon tetrachloride dichloroethane trichloroethene and xylene. the sgvs for ethyl benzene phenol and toluene are dependent on the soil organic matter content content. as an initial screen the sgvs for som are considered to be appropriate. as of february there are a total of plus contaminated sites in canada. one infamous contaminated sited is located near a nickel copper smelting site in sudbury ontario. a study investigating the heavy metal pollution in the vicinity of the smelter reveals that elevated levels of nickel and copper were found in the soil values going as high as ppm ni and ppm cu within a. km range of the smelter location. other metals were also found in the soil such metals include iron cobalt and silver. furthermore upon examining the different vegetation surrounding the smelter it was evident that they too had been affected the results show that the plants contained nickel copper and aluminium as a result of soil contamination. in march the issue of uranium poisoning in punjab attracted press coverage. it was alleged to be caused by fly ash ponds of thermal power stations which reportedly lead to severe birth defects in children in the faridkot and bhatinda districts of punjab. the news reports claimed the uranium levels were more than times the maximum safe limit. in the government of india confirmed that the ground water in malwa belt of punjab has uranium metal that is above the trace limits set by the united nations world health organization. scientific studies based on over samples from various sampling points could not trace the source to fly ash and any sources from thermal power plants or industry as originally alleged. the study also revealed that the uranium concentration in ground water of malwa district is not times the who limits but only above the who limit in locations. this highest concentration found in samples was less than those found naturally in ground waters currently used for human purposes elsewhere such as finland. research is underway to identify natural or other sources for the uranium. plastic waste is choking our planet polluting the air water and soil both people and wildlife need to survive. and as this crisis spreads to every corner of the globe wwf is leading the charge to help reimagine how we source design dispose of and reuse the plastic materials communities most depend upon. because while plastic can help make our hospitals safer our food last longer and our packages more efficient to ship it has no place in nature. every day plastic is flowing into our natural environment at an unprecedented rate a dump truck every minute into our oceans alone. it s time to turn off the tap. together. wwf is uniting our global networks of industry leaders consumers and policymakers to transform our systems so the plastics we discard become plastics we use again. as everyday people continue doing their part to reduce reuse and recycle wwf is engaging policymakers to ensure the plastics leaving recycling bins stay in effective waste management systems and out of the hands of illegal plastic traffickers. through our resource plastic activation hub we re helping some of the world s leading companies translate ambitious plastic commitments into measurable change both across their business operations and well beyond their supply chains. we re working on the ground with local partners from indonesia to peru to keep plastic out of our planet s most extraordinary ecosystems. and in oceans the world over we re supporting communities and fishing crews big and small to improve gear use and recovery so issues like abandoned nets no longer pose one of the biggest threats to marine life. wwf is fighting for a world with no plastic in nature by. it s a world where our oceans teem with marine life not discarded nets bottles and bags. where no human breathes the toxic fumes of burning plastic. and where every indispensable plastic product is used to make another. it s a world where people and nature thrive together. join us. an exorbitant amount of plastic waste continues to plague our oceans threatening marine life and the people who depend on these waters for their livelihoods. despite the dire scope of this crisis the growing momentum to address it is promising. as we work towards a solution for the plastic waste crisis we must do it in a way that does not negatively impact other critical issues that are affecting the environment including the climate forests and food waste. for example when companies substitute paper products for plastics we must ensure that the paper comes from responsibly managed forests particularly those certified by the forest stewardship council. otherwise we re just shifting the environmental cost to another part of nature. wwf s living planet report found that global biodiversity declined by between and. over species are negatively impacted by plastic waste but we re only just starting to understand the effects of plastics on our ecosystems. plastic pollution has far reaching implications for local communities by posing a public health risk decreasing fish stock and contributing to climate change. communities in developing countries are particularly vulnerable to the effects of plastic pollution. in areas with poor infrastructure polluted coastlines where plastic accumulates can create a favorable breeding environment for disease carrying organisms such as insects and rodents. and plastic production represents up to of global petrol use on par with the aviation industry and incinerating plastic waste pollutes our air all while contributing to climate change. only of plastic waste in the us is recycled each year. when plastic ends up in nature this waste affects the fishery maritime and tourism industries causing an estimated billion in economic losses annually. our current waste management system and recycling infrastructure can not properly manage the volume of virgin plastic constantly entering the system. when we throw out plastic instead of recapturing and recycling it we miss an important opportunity to recapture the value of the resources already used for the production of our plastics. there is more than billion worth of plastic material sitting in the united states landfills at this very moment. wwf is advocating for a holistic solution that curbs plastic pollution and its many associated consequences. each one of us is part of the solutions needed for a plastic revolution. wwf works to raise awareness about ways we can address plastic waste in our daily lives through the choices we make about our consumption and habits. whether it s skipping some single use plastic packing or carrying a reusable water bottle we educate our wwf members and activists about the impact they can make to help end plastic pollution. wwf s campaign no plastic in nature aims to fix a broken system using a holistic approach. there is no single solution to plastic pollution we need a combination of strategies and engagement from all actors. by engaging all actors government businesses and the public we can examine every aspect of the life cycle of any given plastic material and identify key elements that are ripe for intervention. while our aim is to eliminate the leakage of plastic into nature by we have also set a goal for establishing a global legally binding agreement to end plastic pollution. such an agreement would introduce specific targets and pave the way for each nation to devise an action plan for addressing the plastic pollution epidemic. wwf is committed to engaging with the united states government and securing our elected officials support on this paris for plastics. companies are uniquely positioned to help drive large scale transformative change by improving their own plastic pollution footprint as well as influencing other key stakeholders like governments and consumers to do the same. through wwf s activation hub resource plastic we seek to redesign how businesses source use and dispose of plastics. to learn more about resource plastic please visit resource plastic. com. in coordination with several global consumer brand companies wwf has also established the bioplastic feedstock alliance a science driven organization which aims to evaluate diverse bioplastic feedstocks to better understand the potential sustainability opportunities of each. the bfa helps the bioplastic industry s emerging supply chain move in a positive direction. a major threat to marine biodiversity abandoned fishing gear or ghost gear is estimated to comprise up to of plastic waste in our oceans by volume. while this may seem like a small number ghost gear is the most harmful form of plastic pollution to marine species. ghost gear continues to capture wildlife well after it s abandoned pollute habitats and enters the food web as it degrades. ghost gear impacts of all marine mammals on the red list of threatened species. fishing feeds billions of people and is vital to the economies of countless coastal communities. but unsustainable practices litter the ocean with deadly traps that needlessly kill marine mammals turtles and seabirds. abandoned lost or discarded fishing gear commonly referred to as ghost gear contribute significantly to the problem of plastic pollution in our ocean. these gillnets traps and other types of fishing gear are particularly harmful because they can continue to catch target and non target species indiscriminately for years. this impacts important food resources as well as endangered species. because of this ghost gear has been coined as the most deadly form of marine plastic debris damaging vital ocean habitats aquatic life and livelihoods. eight million metric tons of plastic are leaking into our oceans every year. ask our government leaders to help stop plastics from leaking into our oceans. donate to support wwfs conservation efforts and say no to plastic by using wwf s reusable strawworld wildlife fund street n. w. washington dc world wildlife fund inc. is a nonprofit tax exempt charitable organization under section of the internal revenue code. donations are tax deductible as allowed by law. world wildlife fund. wwf and panda symbol are owned by wwf. all rights reserved. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. copyright national geographic societycopyright national geographic partners llc. all rights reserved air pollution is the release of pollutants such as gases particles biological molecules etc. into the air that is harmful to human health and the environment. air pollution refers to any physical chemical or biological change in the air. it is the contamination of air by harmful gases dust and smoke which affects plants animals and humans drastically. there is a certain percentage of gases present in the atmosphere. an increase or decrease in the composition of these gases is harmful to survival. this imbalance in the gaseous composition has resulted in an increase in earth s temperature which is known as global warming. there are two types of air pollutants the pollutants that directly cause air pollution are known as primary pollutants. sulphur dioxide emitted from factories is a primary pollutant. the pollutants formed by the intermingling and reaction of primary pollutants are known as secondary pollutants. smog formed by the intermingling of smoke and fog is a secondary pollutant. also read water pollutionfollowing are the important causes of air pollution the combustion of fossil fuels emits a large amount of sulphur dioxide. carbon monoxide released by incomplete combustion of fossil fuels also results in air pollution. the gases emitted from vehicles such as jeeps trucks cars buses etc. pollute the environment. these are the major sources of greenhouse gases and also result in diseases among individuals. ammonia is one of the most hazardous gases emitted during agricultural activities. the insecticides pesticides and fertilizers emit harmful chemicals in the atmosphere and contaminate it. factories and industries are the main source of carbon monoxide organic compounds hydrocarbons and chemicals. these are released into the air degrading its quality. in the mining process the minerals below the earth are extracted using large pieces of equipment. the dust and chemicals released during the process not only pollute the air but also deteriorate the health of the workers and people living in the nearby areas. the household cleaning products and paints contain toxic chemicals that are released in the air. the smell from the newly painted walls is the smell of the chemicals present in the paints. it not only pollutes the air but also affects breathing. also read ozone layer depletionthe hazardous effects of air pollution on the environment include air pollution has resulted in several respiratory disorders and heart diseases among humans. the cases of lung cancer have increased in the last few decades. children living near polluted areas are more prone to pneumonia and asthma. many people die every year due to the direct or indirect effects of air pollution. due to the emission of greenhouse gases there is an imbalance in the gaseous composition of the air. this has led to an increase in the temperature of the earth. this increase in earth s temperature is known as global warming. this has resulted in the melting of glaciers and an increase in sea levels. many areas are submerged underwater. the burning of fossil fuels releases harmful gases such as nitrogen oxides and sulphur oxides in the air. the water droplets combine with these pollutants become acidic and fall as acid rain which damages human animal and plant life. the release of chlorofluorocarbons halons and hydro chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere is the major cause of depletion of the ozone layer. the depleting ozone layer does not prevent the harmful ultraviolet rays coming from the sun and causes skin diseases and eye problems among individuals. the air pollutants suspend on the water bodies and affect the aquatic life. pollution also compels the animals to leave their habitat and shift to a new place. this renders them stray and has also led to the extinction of a large number of animal species. following are the measures one should adopt to control air pollution people should avoid using vehicles for shorter distances. rather they should prefer public modes of transport to travel from one place to another. this not only prevents pollution but also conserves energy. a large number of fossil fuels are burnt to generate electricity. therefore do not forget to switch off the electrical appliances when not in use. thus you can save the environment at the individual level. use of energy efficient devices such cfls also controls pollution to a greater level. the use of solar wind and geothermal energies reduce air pollution at a larger level. various countries including india have implemented the use of these resources as a step towards a cleaner environment. other air pollution control measures include also read environmental issuesto know more about what is air pollution its definition causes effects types of pollutants and air pollution control measures keep visiting byju s website or download the byju s app for further reference. put your understanding of this concept to test by answering a few mcqs. click start quiz to begin select the correct answer and click on the finish buttoncheck your score and answers at the end of the quizcongrats visit byju s for all biology related queries and study materialsyour result is as belowvery well explained. i could not find so amazing information on air pollution for school hw. epic stuff thank u for this this was very helpfull for me yes everyone has not aware about pollution and but we do effort for reduce pollution make our earth future brightright brothank you byjus for such an easy lesson relevant answers and easy to learn and understandbyjus helps me alotthanksat the time of lockdown the environment has improved but when the lockdown will end the pollution rate would increaseotherwise nicely explainedkeep it upthanx for all these info. a very informative pagethere is nothing more than living in a world full of polluted gas and we leave bad environment for our future generation. lets keep the word a beautiful place to live for everyone. very useful used it for my daughter s oralit is very usefuli understood everythingnice presentation and explanation and it s very useful for better understandingthank you so much this content was really very informative helpful and too useful for me. thanks to byjus thank you soo much for this info. it was really helpful for my projectthank you byjusthank you sooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo much this helped me in my projectthank you byju s. this helped in my preasentationit helped me a lot with my project thank you so much byjus it s very good for studentswell explained your mobile number and email id will not be published. required fields are marked request otp onvoice callwebsite post comment bookfree classbookfree classjump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. british poet w. h. auden once noted thousands have lived without love not one without water. yet while we all know water is crucial for life we trash it anyway. some percent of the world s wastewater is dumpedlargely untreatedback into the environment polluting rivers lakes and oceans. this widespread problem of water pollution is jeopardizing our health. unsafe water kills more people each year than war and all other forms of violence combined. meanwhile our drinkable water sources are finite less than percent of the earth s freshwater is actually accessible to us. without action the challenges will only increase by when global demand for freshwater is expected to be one third greater than it is now. sip a glass of cool clear water as you read this and you may think water pollution is a problem... somewhere else. but while most americans have access to safe drinking water potentially harmful contaminantsfrom arsenic to copper to leadhave been found in the tap water of every single state in the nation. still we re not hopeless against the threat to clean water. to better understand the problem and what we can do about it here s an overview of what water pollution is what causes it and how we can protect ourselves. water pollution occurs when harmful substancesoften chemicals or microorganismscontaminate a stream river lake ocean aquifer or other body of water degrading water quality and rendering it toxic to humans or the environment. water is uniquely vulnerable to pollution. known as a universal solvent water is able to dissolve more substances than any other liquid on earth. it s the reason we have kool aid and brilliant blue waterfalls. it s also why water is so easily polluted. toxic substances from farms towns and factories readily dissolve into and mix with it causing water pollution. when rain falls and seeps deep into the earth filling the cracks crevices and porous spaces of an aquifer it becomes groundwaterone of our least visible but most important natural resources. nearly percent of americans rely on groundwater pumped to the earth s surface for drinking water. for some folks in rural areas it s their only freshwater source. groundwater gets polluted when contaminantsfrom pesticides and fertilizers to waste leached from landfills and septic systemsmake their way into an aquifer rendering it unsafe for human use. ridding groundwater of contaminants can be difficult to impossible as well as costly. once polluted an aquifer may be unusable for decades or even thousands of years. groundwater can also spread contamination far from the original polluting source as it seeps into streams lakes and oceans. covering about percent of the earth surface water is what fills our oceans lakes rivers and all those other blue bits on the world map. surface water from freshwater sources accounts for more than percent of the water delivered to american homes. but a significant pool of that water is in peril. according to the most recent surveys on national water quality from the u. s. environmental protection agency nearly half of our rivers and streams and more than one third of our lakes are polluted and unfit for swimming fishing and drinking. nutrient pollution which includes nitrates and phosphates is the leading type of contamination in these freshwater sources. while plants and animals need these nutrients to grow they have become a major pollutant due to farm waste and fertilizer runoff. municipal and industrial waste discharges contribute their fair share of toxins as well. there s also all the random junk that industry and individuals dump directly into waterways. eighty percent of ocean pollution originates on landwhether along the coast or far inland. contaminants such as chemicals nutrients and heavy metals are carried from farms factories and cities by streams and rivers into our bays and estuaries from there they travel out to sea. meanwhile marine debrisparticularly plasticis blown in by the wind or washed in via storm drains and sewers. our seas are also sometimes spoiled by oil spills and leaksbig and smalland are consistently soaking up carbon pollution from the air. the ocean absorbs as much as a quarter of man made carbon emissions. when contamination originates from a single source it s called point source pollution. examples include wastewater discharged legally or illegally by a manufacturer oil refinery or wastewater treatment facility as well as contamination from leaking septic systems chemical and oil spills and illegal dumping. the epa regulates point source pollution by establishing limits on what can be discharged by a facility directly into a body of water. while point source pollution originates from a specific place it can affect miles of waterways and ocean. nonpoint source pollution is contamination derived from diffuse sources. these may include agricultural or stormwater runoff or debris blown into waterways from land. nonpoint source pollution is the leading cause of water pollution in u. s. waters but it s difficult to regulate since there s no single identifiable culprit. it goes without saying that water pollution can t be contained by a line on a map. transboundary pollution is the result of contaminated water from one country spilling into the waters of another. contamination can result from a disasterlike an oil spillor the slow downriver creep of industrial agricultural or municipal discharge. aurora photos alamynot only is the agricultural sector the biggest consumer of global freshwater resources with farming and livestock production using about percent of the earth s surface water supplies but it s also a serious water polluter. around the world agriculture is the leading cause of water degradation. in the united states agricultural pollution is the top source of contamination in rivers and streams the second biggest source in wetlands and the third main source in lakes. it s also a major contributor of contamination to estuaries and groundwater. every time it rains fertilizers pesticides and animal waste from farms and livestock operations wash nutrients and pathogenssuch bacteria and virusesinto our waterways. nutrient pollution caused by excess nitrogen and phosphorus in water or air is the number one threat to water quality worldwide and can cause algal blooms a toxic soup of blue green algae that can be harmful to people and wildlife. used water is wastewater. it comes from our sinks showers and toilets and from commercial industrial and agricultural activities. the term also includes stormwater runoff which occurs when rainfall carries road salts oil grease chemicals and debris from impermeable surfaces into our waterwaysmore than percent of the world s wastewater flows back into the environment without being treated or reused according to the united nations in some least developed countries the figure tops percent. in the united states wastewater treatment facilities process about billion gallons of wastewater per day. these facilities reduce the amount of pollutants such as pathogens phosphorus and nitrogen in sewage as well as heavy metals and toxic chemicals in industrial waste before discharging the treated waters back into waterways. that s when all goes well. but according to epa estimates our nation s aging and easily overwhelmed sewage treatment systems also release more than billion gallons of untreated wastewater each year. big spills may dominate headlines but consumers account for the vast majority of oil pollution in our seas including oil and gasoline that drips from millions of cars and trucks every day. moreover nearly half of the estimated million tons of oil that makes its way into marine environments each year comes not from tanker spills but from land based sources such as factories farms and cities. at sea tanker spills account for about percent of the oil in waters around the world while regular operations of the shipping industrythrough both legal and illegal dischargescontribute about one third. oil is also naturally released from under the ocean floor through fractures known as seeps. radioactive waste is any pollution that emits radiation beyond what is naturally released by the environment. it s generated by uranium mining nuclear power plants and the production and testing of military weapons as well as by universities and hospitals that use radioactive materials for research and medicine. radioactive waste can persist in the environment for thousands of years making disposal a major challenge. consider the decommissioned hanford nuclear weapons production site in washington where the cleanup of million gallons of radioactive waste is expected to cost more than billion and last through. accidentally released or improperly disposed of contaminants threaten groundwater surface water and marine resources. to put it bluntly water pollution kills. in fact it caused. million deaths in according to a study published in the lancet. contaminated water can also make you ill. every year unsafe water sickens about billion people. and low income communities are disproportionately at risk because their homes are often closest to the most polluting industries. waterborne pathogens in the form of disease causing bacteria and viruses from human and animal waste are a major cause of illness from contaminated drinking water. diseases spread by unsafe water include cholera giardia and typhoid. even in wealthy nations accidental or illegal releases from sewage treatment facilities as well as runoff from farms and urban areas contribute harmful pathogens to waterways. thousands of people across the united states are sickened every year by legionnaires disease with cases cropping up from california s disneyland to manhattan s upper east side. todd mcinturf the detroit news apmeanwhile the plight of residents in flint michiganwhere cost cutting measures and aging water infrastructure created the recent lead contamination crisisoffers a stark look at how dangerous chemical and other industrial pollutants in our water can be. the problem goes far beyond flint and involves much more than lead as a wide range of chemical pollutantsfrom heavy metals such as arsenic and mercury to pesticides and nitrate fertilizersare getting into our water supplies. once they re ingested these toxins can cause a host of health issues from cancer to hormone disruption to altered brain function. children and pregnant women are particularly at risk. even swimming can pose a risk. every year. million americans contract health issues such as skin rashes pinkeye respiratory infections and hepatitis from sewage laden coastal waters according to epa estimates. in order to thrive healthy ecosystems rely on a complex web of animals plants bacteria and fungiall of which interact directly or indirectly with each other. harm to any of these organisms can create a chain effect imperiling entire aquatic environments. when water pollution causes an algal bloom in a lake or marine environment the proliferation of newly introduced nutrients stimulates plant and algae growth which in turn reduces oxygen levels in the water. this dearth of oxygen known as eutrophication suffocates plants and animals and can create dead zones where waters are essentially devoid of life. in certain cases these harmful algal blooms can also produce neurotoxins that affect wildlife from whales to sea turtles. chemicals and heavy metals from industrial and municipal wastewater contaminate waterways as well. these contaminants are toxic to aquatic lifemost often reducing an organism s life span and ability to reproduceand make their way up the food chain as predator eats prey. that s how tuna and other big fish accumulate high quantities of toxins such as mercury. marine ecosystems are also threatened by marine debris which can strangle suffocate and starve animals. much of this solid debris such as plastic bags and soda cans gets swept into sewers and storm drains and eventually out to sea turning our oceans into trash soup and sometimes consolidating to form floating garbage patches. discarded fishing gear and other types of debris are responsible for harming more than different species of marine life. meanwhile ocean acidification is making it tougher for shellfish and coral to survive. though they absorb about a quarter of the carbon pollution created each year by burning fossil fuels oceans are becoming more acidic. this process makes it harder for shellfish and other species to build shells and may impact the nervous systems of sharks clownfish and other marine life. it s easy to tsk tsk the oil company with a leaking tanker but we re all accountable to some degree for today s water pollution problem. fortunately there are some simple ways you can prevent water contamination or at least limit your contribution to it one of the most effective ways to stand up for our waters is to speak out in support of the clean water rule which clarifies the clean water act s scope and protects the drinking water of one in three americans. tell the federal government the u. s. army corps of engineers and your local elected officials that you support the clean water rule. also learn how you and those around you can get involved in the policymaking process. our public waterways serve every american. we should all have a say in how they re protected. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. the mighty bivalves are both and this former schoolteacher and bartender seeks to inspire a new generation of aquaculturists while putting north carolina oysters on the map. the humble bivalves which concentrate everything from heavy metals to cancer drugs in their tissues provide an ideal way for scientists to monitor nearshore water health. the rollback jeopardizes the streams that flow into the state s rivers lakes and bays millions of acres of wetlands across the country and the drinking water supply. litter sewage plastic and other pollutants do more than just ruin the beauty of the beach. they are closing down coastal areas destroying marine life and making people seriously sick. federal rollbacks could leave new mexico s limited water dirtier by excluding up to percent of the state s waterways from protection. the pfas laden firefighting foam used in training exercises at military bases easily slips into groundwater supplies tainting everything around it. with their latest rollback the president and the epa chief show that they either don t understand how water pollution worksor simply don t care. as droughts parch the southeast interstate squabbles heat up over the tennessee river. seth siegel author of the new book troubled water what s wrong with what we drink says we must change people s mind sets and get to the root of the issue to ensure safe drinking water for everyone. ugly foul smelling and sometimes toxic algal blooms are becoming more common in freshwater ecosystems like rivers lakes ponds and reservoirs. here s a look at how excess algae can impact the environmentand human health. in a move that could open the door to industrial waste and interstate squabbles the ohio river valley water sanitation commission is making its water quality standards voluntary. president trump revokes the clean water rule and doubles down on his fake weather forecast while the bureau of land management hitches up its wagons to move west. the fate of southern arizona s embattled san pedro river could hinge on whether the government acts to protect the nearly extinct arizona eryngoand in doing so puts the brakes on groundwater pumping that s draining the landscape. from fertilizer runoff to methane emissions large scale industrial agriculture pollution takes a toll on the environment. the administration relocates science jobs refuses to fill others and tosses a lifeline to polluters. otherwise it was just an ordinary week of secret meetings and betrayals of the public interest. a growing number of communitiesboth coastal and inlandare finding themselves underwater. extreme weather sea level rise and other climate change impacts are increasingly to blame. here s a look at what links flooding and our warming world. more than craft breweries from across the country including brooklyn brewery and new belgium brewing company are joining nrdc to explain why clean water is essential for great tasting beer. by relying on plants soil and natural systems to manage rainfall runoff green infrastructure tackles urban water woes and boosts climate resilience. here s how. after an illegal dumping of close to tons of dangerous sludge and contaminated materials across the street from two schools a kentucky community struggles with what to do next. ten years after the disaster at a tennessee power plant the cleanup crew is seeking justice. at the same time the trump administration is weakening protections for this toxic pollution. as the trump administration ratchets up its rhetoric demanding billions for a wall american communities along the mexico border are in need of basic services like reliable sewage treatment. after officials repeatedly dismissed claims that flint s water was making people sick residents took action. here s how the lead contamination crisis unfoldedand what we can learn from it. the problem of how to dispose of nuclear waste has haunted the united states for six decades. it s now landed on new mexico s doorstep. lizzie carr is shining a light on what is floating through the world s waterways and breaking athletic records along the way. residents of cities like pittsburgh and newark continue to face high levels of this toxic metal in their drinking water supplies. here s what to do if this crisis affects you. here s why this environmental and public health win is so important. the trump administration wants to open our waterways back up to pollution. for years the state has ignored its foamy rivers and water supplies contaminated with chemicals called pfass. the big apple s combined sewer system is years oldand in desperate need of improvement. vague regulations let government officials hide drinking water contamination from the public. toxic algal blooms are suffocating waterways from the gulf of mexico to lake erie. for drinking water flood control climate defense habitat protection fishing swimming and of course craft beer. quick and easy things you can do to reduce water pollution and runoff. the cruel and un american folly of shutting down the epa s environmental justice program. lots of people think drinking bottled water is safer. is it thanks to the mississippi river s trash stream the gulf has some of the highest concentrations of plastic in the world. plus wheeler ignores factory farm pollution zinke ignores damage to wetlands and trump ignores public opposition to drilling the arctic refuge. when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosureswe use cookies to analyse how visitors use our website and to help us provide the best possible experience for users. view our cookie policy. tweet wwf ral garcavisit the wwf teachers sectionmore information on oceansriverslakeswetlandsfreshwateragricultureworking to sustain the natural world for the benefit of people and nature wwf world wide fund for nature panda symbol wwf world wide fund for nature wwf is a wwf registered trademark creative commons license. water pollution is defined as the presence in groundwater of toxic chemicals and biological agents that exceed what is naturally found in the water and may pose a threat to human health and or the environment. additionally water pollution may consist of chemicals introduced into the water bodies as a result of various human activities. any amount of those chemicals pollutes the water regardless of the harm they may pose to human health and the environment. many of the chlorinated solvents commonly used in industry are examples of such chemicals polluting our waters exclusively due to human activities. another example is mtbe a gasoline oxygenate that is currently banned in the u. s. regardless of their provenance the chemicals or biological agents causing water pollution are generically referred to as water pollutants. the chemical and biological agents represent the main causes of water pollution and are generically referred to as water pollutants. any kind of water can become polluted regardless of its size or location. this includes lakes from remote areas or huge water bodies and is due to the air transportation of pollutant particles and their transfer into precipitation water. the groundwater and surface water consist of swimming pools ponds lakes creeks rivers seas and oceans that may all become polluted at some point. due to the quick diffusion and dissipation of contamination and the faster natural degradation processes the bigger the water body is the shorter the time required for naturally cleansing the pollution and recovery. there are various types of water pollution based on the various causes of water pollution. various classifications can be made based on various water pollution causes. the type of the water pollutants based on this classification criteria water pollution can be i chemical when various chemicals are the water pollution causes. the following chemicals are the most common water pollutants ii radiological when radioactive materials are the water pollutant causes. iii biological when various microorganisms worms and or algae occurring in a large number are the water pollution causes. this type of pollution is caused by decaying organic material in water animal wastes as well as improper disposal of human wastes.. the type of the source of water pollutants these are localized sources like an industrial process a mining activity etc. these sources are usually regulated so that the effect may be predicted and the impact minimized. however accidental leaks and spills are an exception to that. these are unidentified sources from which pollutants are carried away by water discharges and runoffs. non point pollution may involve a broad range of pollutants but in lower amounts than the point sources. the main sources of pollution are all resulted from the disposal of chemical substances coming from medical industrial and household waste chaotic agricultural fertilizers disposal and accidental oil spills that pollute the water to a large extent. examples of major water pollutants that affect the health of humans are examples of major water pollutants that affect the ecosystem only are the following water pollution may cause a large variety of diseases and poses a serious problem for human health. this is mainly because we may get exposed to polluted water in various ways including but not necessarily limited to the effects of water pollution may appear immediately after exposure and be more or less violent in the case of drinking water with a high amount of pollutants. on the other hand the effects may appear some time after repetitive exposure to water contaminated with lower amounts of pollutants. the health effects of drinking contaminated water may range from simple intoxication and stomach aches to deadly diseases or sudden death. february read by usersaugust read by usersfebruary read by userscopyright www. environmentalpollutioncenters. org all rights reserved. disclaimer terms of use privacy policy sitemapcopyright national geographic societycopyright national geographic partners llc. all rights reservedthe requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. by chris woodford. last updated june. over two thirds of earths surface is covered by water less than a third is taken up by land. as earths population continues to grow people are putting ever increasing pressure on the planets waterresources. in a sense our oceans rivers and other inland waters arebeing squeezed by human activitiesnot so they take up less room butso their quality is reduced. poorer water quality means water pollution. we know that pollution is a human problem because it is arelatively recent development in the planets history before the century industrial revolution people lived more in harmony with theirimmediate environment. as industrialization has spread around theglobe so the problem of pollution has spread with it. when earthspopulation was much smaller no one believed pollution would everpresent a serious problem. it was once popularly believed thatthe oceans were far too big to pollute. today with around billionpeople on the planet it has become apparent that there are limits. pollution is one of the signs that humans have exceeded those limits. how serious is the problem according to the environmental campaign organizationwwf pollution from toxic chemicals threatens life on this planet. every ocean and every continent from the tropics to the once pristine polar regions is contaminated. photo detergent pollution entering a river. photo courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. water pollution can be defined in many ways. usually it means oneor more substances have built up in water to such an extent that theycause problems for animals or people. oceans lakes rivers and otherinland waters can naturally clean up a certain amount of pollution bydispersing it harmlessly. if you poured a cup of black ink into ariver the ink would quickly disappear into the rivers much larger volume of clean water. the inkwould still be there in the river but in such a low concentration thatyou would not be able to see it. at such low levels the chemicals in the ink probably would not present any real problem. however if you poured gallons of ink into a river every few seconds through a pipe the river would quickly turn black. the chemicals in the ink could very quickly have an effect on the quality of the water. this in turn could affect the health of all the plants animals and humans whoselives depend on the river. photo pollution means adding substances to the environment that dont belong therelike theair pollution from this smokestack. pollution is not always as obvious as this however. thus water pollution is all about quantities how much of apolluting substance is released and how big a volume of water it isreleased into. a small quantity of a toxic chemical may have littleimpact if it is spilled into the ocean from a ship. but the same amountof the same chemical can have a much bigger impact pumped into a lakeor river where there is less clean water to disperse it. water pollution almost always means that some damage has been done to an ocean river lake or other water source. a united nations report defined ocean pollution as fortunately earth is forgiving and damage from water pollution is often reversible. when we think of earths water resources we think of hugeoceans lakes and rivers. water resources like these are called surfacewaters. the most obvious type of water pollution affects surfacewaters. for example a spill from an oil tanker creates an oil slickthat can affect a vast area of the ocean. not all of earths water sits on its surface however. a great dealof water is held in underground rock structures known as aquifers which we can not see and seldom think about. water stored underground in aquifers is known as groundwater. aquifers feed our rivers and supply much of our drinking water. theytoo can become polluted for example when weed killers used inpeoples gardens drain into the ground. groundwater pollution is muchless obvious than surface water pollution but is no less of a problem. in a study in iowa in the united states found that over half thestates groundwater wells were contaminated with weed killers. you might think things would have improved since then but two decades on all thats really changed is the name of the chemicalswere using. today numerous scientific studies are still finding weed killers in groundwater in worrying quantities a study discovered glyphosate in percent of groundwater samples from catalonia spain scientific opinion differs on whether this is safe or not. surface waters and groundwater are the two types of water resourcesthat pollution affects. there are also two different ways in whichpollution can occur. if pollution comes from a single location such asa discharge pipe attached to a factory it is known as point sourcepollution. other examples of point source pollution include an oilspill from a tanker a discharge from a smoke stack or someone pouring oil from their car down a drain. a great deal ofwater pollution happens not from one single source but from manydifferent scattered sources. this is called nonpoint sourcepollution. photo above point source pollution comes from a single well defined place such as this pipe. below nonpoint source pollution comes from many sources. all the industrial plants alongside a river and theships that service them may be polluting the river collectively. both photos courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. when point source pollution enters the environment the place mostaffected is usually the area immediately around the source. forexample when a tanker accident occurs the oil slick is concentratedaround the tanker itself and in the right ocean conditions thepollution disperses the further away from the tanker you go. this isless likely to happen with nonpoint source pollution which bydefinition enters the environment from many different places at once. sometimes pollution that enters the environment in one place has aneffect hundreds or even thousands of miles away. this is known as transboundarypollution. one example is the way radioactive waste travels throughthe oceans from nuclear reprocessing plants in england and france tonearby countries such as ireland and norway. some forms of water pollution are very obvious everyone has seen tvnews footage of oil slicks filmed from helicopters flying overhead. water pollution is usually less obvious and much harder to detect thanthis. but how can we measure water pollution when we can not see it howdo we even know its there there are two main ways of measuring the quality of water. one is totake samples of the water and measure the concentrations of differentchemicals that it contains. if the chemicals are dangerous or theconcentrations are too great we can regard the water as polluted. measurements like this are known as chemical indicators ofwater quality. another way to measure water quality involves examiningthe fish insects and other invertebrates that the water will support. if many different types of creatures can live in a river the quality is likely tobe very good if the river supports no fish life at all the quality isobviously much poorer. measurements like this are called biologicalindicators of water quality. most water pollution doesnt begin in the water itself. take the oceans around percent of ocean pollution enters our seas from the land. virtually any human activity can have an effect on the quality of ourwater environment. when farmers fertilize the fields the chemicalsthey use are gradually washed by rain into the groundwater or surfacewaters nearby. sometimes the causes of water pollution are quitesurprising. chemicals released by smokestacks can enter theatmosphere and then fall back to earth as rain entering seas rivers and lakes and causing water pollution. thats called atmospheric deposition. water pollution has many different causes and this is one of the reasons why it is such adifficult problem to solve. with billions of people on the planet disposing of sewage wasteis a major problem. according to figures from the world health organization some billion people dont have access to safe drinking wateror the most basic sanitation. billion lack safely managed sanitation. although there have been great improvements in securing access to clean water relatively little genuine progress has been made on improving global sanitation in the last decade. sewage disposal affects peoples immediate environments and leads towater related illnesses such as diarrhea that kills children under five each year. in developed countries most people have flush toilets that takesewage waste quickly and hygienically away from their homes. yet the problem of sewage disposal does not end there. when youflush the toilet the waste has to go somewhere and even after itleaves the sewage treatment works there is still waste to dispose of. sometimes sewage waste is pumped untreated into the sea. until the early s around million tons of sewage was dumpedby barge from new york city each year. according to figures from the uk governments department forthe environment food and rural affairs the sewers of britain collect around billion liters of waste water every day there are still sewage overflow pipes through which in certain circumstances such as heavy storms raw sewage is pumped untreated into the sea. the new river that crosses the border from mexicointo california once carried with it million gallons of raw sewage each day a new waste water plant on the us mexico border completed in substantiallysolved that problem. unfortunately even in some of the richest nations thepractice of dumping sewage into the sea continues. in early it was reported that the tiny island of guernsey has decided to continue dumping tons of raw sewageinto the sea each day. in theory sewage is a completely natural substance that should bebroken down harmlessly in the environment percent of sewage is water. in practice sewage contains all kinds of other chemicals from the pharmaceutical drugs people take tothe paper plastic and other wastes they flush down their toilets. when people are sick with viruses the sewage they produce carriesthose viruses into the environment. it is possible to catch illnessessuch as hepatitis typhoid and cholera from river and sea water. photo during crop spraying some chemicals will drain into the soil. eventually they seep intorivers and other watercourses. photo courtesy of us department of agriculture agricultural research service. suitably treated and used in moderate quantities sewage can be afertilizer it returns important nutrients to the environment such asnitrogen and phosphorus which plants and animals need for growth. thetrouble is sewage is often released in much greater quantities thanthe natural environment can cope with. chemical fertilizers used byfarmers also add nutrients to the soil which drain into rivers andseas and add to the fertilizing effect of the sewage. together sewageand fertilizers can cause a massive increase in the growth of algae orplankton that overwhelms huge areas of oceans lakes or rivers. thisis known as a harmful algal bloom. it is harmful because itremoves oxygen from the water that kills other forms of life leadingto what is known as a dead zone. the gulf of mexico has one ofthe worlds most spectacular dead zones. each summer accordingto studies by the noaa it typically grows to an area of around square miles which isabout the same size as the state of connecticut. a few statistics illustrate the scale of the problem that wastewater cancause. around half of all ocean pollution is caused by sewage and wastewater. each year the world generates perhaps billion tons of industrialwaste much of which is pumped untreated into rivers oceans and otherwaterways. in the united states alone around factories takeclean water from rivers and many pump polluted waters back in theirplace. however there have been major improvements in waste watertreatment recently. since in the united states the environmental protection agency has invested about billion in improving water treatment plants that as of serve around percent of the us population. however another billion is still needed to update and upgrade the system. factories are point sources of water pollution but quite a lot ofwater is polluted by ordinary people from nonpoint sources this is howordinary water becomes waste water in the first place. virtually everyone pours chemicals of one sort or another down theirdrains or toilets. even detergents used inwashing machines anddishwashers eventually end up in our rivers and oceans. so do thepesticides we use on our gardens. a lot of toxic pollution also enterswaste water from highway runoff. highways are typically coveredwith a cocktail of toxic chemicalseverything from spilled fuel andbrake fluids to bits of worn tires and exhaust emissions. when it rains these chemicals washinto drains and rivers. it is not unusual for heavy summer rainstormsto wash toxic chemicals into rivers in such concentrations that theykill large numbers of fish overnight. it has been estimated that inone year the highway runoff from a single large city leaks as much oilinto our water environment as a typical tanker spill. some highway runoff runs away into drains others can pollute groundwater or accumulate in the land next to a road making it increasingly toxic as the years go by. detergents are relatively mild substances. at the opposite end of thespectrum are highly toxic chemicals such as polychlorinatedbiphenyls. they were once widely used to manufactureelectronic circuit boards but their harmful effects have now been recognized and their use is highly restricted in many countries. nevertheless an estimated half million tons of pcbs were dischargedinto the environment during the century. in a classicexample of transboundary pollution traces of pcbs have even been foundin birds and fish in the arctic. they were carried there through theoceans thousands of miles from where they originally entered theenvironment. although pcbs are widely banned their effects will befelt for many decades because they last a long time in the environmentwithout breaking down. another kind of toxic pollution comes from heavy metals such aslead cadmium and mercury. lead was once commonly used in gasoline though its use is now restricted in some countries. mercuryand cadmium are still used in batteries. until recently a highlytoxic chemical called tributyltin was used in paints toprotect boats from the ravaging effects of the oceans. ironically however tbt was gradually recognized as a pollutant boats paintedwith it were doing as much damage to the oceans as the oceans weredoing to the boats. the best known example of heavy metal pollution in the oceans tookplace in when a japanese factory discharged a significant amountof mercury metal into minamata bay contaminating the fish stocksthere. it took a decade for the problem to come to light. by that time many local people had eaten the fish and around were poisoned. hundreds of people were left dead or disabled. people view radioactive waste with great alarmand for good reason. at high enough concentrations it can kill in lower concentrations itcan cause cancers and other illnesses. the biggest sources ofradioactive pollution in europe are two factories that reprocess wastefuel from nuclear power plants sellafield on the north west coast of britain and cap la hague on thenorth coast of france. both discharge radioactive waste water into thesea which ocean currents then carry around the world. countries suchas norway which lie downstream from britain receive significantdoses of radioactive pollution from sellafield. the norwegian government has repeatedly complained that sellafield hasincreased radiation levels along its coast by times. both the irish and norwegian governments continue to press forthe plants closure. photo oil tanker spills are the most spectacular forms of pollution and the ones that catch public attention but only a fraction of all water pollution happens this way. photo courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. when we think of ocean pollution huge black oil slicks often springto mind yet these spectacular accidents represent only a tiny fractionof all the pollution entering our oceans. even considering oil byitself tanker spills are not as significant as they might seem only percent of the oil that enters the oceans comes from tanker accidents over percent of oil pollution at sea comes from routine shipping and from theoil people pour down drains on land. however what makes tanker spillsso destructive is the sheer quantity of oil they release at once inother words the concentration of oil they produce in one verylocalized part of the marine environment. the biggest oil spill inrecent years occurred when the tanker exxon valdez broke up inprince william sound in alaska in. around million gallons of oil were released into the pristine wildernessenough to fill your living room times over estimates of the marine animals killed in the spillvary from approximately sea otters and birds to as many as sea otters and sea birds. several billion salmon and herring eggs are also believed to have been destroyed. if youve ever taken part in a community beach clean youll knowthat plastic is far and away the most common substance that washes upwith the waves. there are three reasons for this plastic is one ofthe most common materials used for making virtually every kind ofmanufactured object from clothing to automobile parts plasticis light and floats easily so it can travel enormous distances acrossthe oceans most plastics are not biodegradable which means that things likeplastic bottle tops can survive in the marine environment for a long time. while plastics are not toxic in quite the same way as poisonouschemicals they nevertheless present a major hazard to seabirds fish and other marine creatures. for example plastic fishing lines andother debris can strangle or choke fish. about half of allthe worlds seabird species are known to have eaten plastic residues. in one study of shearwaters in the north pacific over percent of the birds were found to contain plastic residues in their stomachs. in the early s marine scientist tim benton collecteddebris from a km length of beach in the remote pitcairn islandsin the south pacific. his study recorded approximately a thousandpieces of garbage including pieces of plastic plastic bottles and two dolls heads. today much media attention focuses on the great pacific garbage patch a floating oceanic graveyard of plastic junk roughly three times the size of france discovered by sailor charles j. moore in. but as youll know well enough if youve ever taken part in a community beachclean persistent plastic litters every ocean on the planet some million tons of new plastic are dumped in the sea every single year. most peoples idea of water pollution involves things like sewage toxic metals or oil slicks but pollution can be biological as well aschemical. in some parts of the world alien species are a majorproblem. alien species are animals or plants from one region that have been introduced into adifferent ecosystem where they do not belong. outside their normalenvironment they have no natural predators so they rapidly run wild crowding out the usual animals or plants that thrive there. commonexamples of alien species include zebra mussels in the great lakes ofthe usa which were carried there from europe by ballast water. the mediterranean sea has been invaded by akind of alien algaecalled caulerpa taxifolia. in the black sea an alien jellyfishcalled mnemiopsis leidyi reduced fish stocks by percent afterarriving in ballast water. in san francisco bay asian clams called potamocorbulaamurensis also introduced by ballast water have dramaticallyaltered the ecosystem. in cornell universitys david pimentel estimated that alien invaders like this cost the us economy billion a year in the european commission put the cost to europe at billion a year and growingall the time. photo invasive species above water hyacinth crowding out a waterway around an old fence post. photo by steve hillebrand. below non native zebra mussels clumped on a native mussel. both photos courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. these are the most common forms of pollutionbut by no means theonly ones. heat or thermal pollution from factories and powerplants also causes problems in rivers. by raising the temperature itreduces the amount of oxygen dissolved in the water thus also reducingthe level of aquatic life that the river can support. another type of pollution involves the disruption of sedimentsthat flow from rivers into the sea. dams built for hydroelectric poweror water reservoirs can reduce the sediment flow. this reduces the formation of beaches increases coastal erosion and reduces the flow ofnutrients from rivers into seas. increased sediments can also present a problem. during construction work soil rock and other fine powders sometimes enters nearby rivers in large quantities causing it to become turbid. the extra sediment can block the gills of fish effectively suffocating them. construction firms often now take precautions to prevent this kind of pollution from happening. some people believe pollution is an inescapable result of humanactivity they argue that if we want to have factories cities ships cars oil and coastal resorts some degree of pollution is almostcertain to result. in other words pollution is a necessary evil that peoplemust put up with if they want to make progress. fortunately noteveryone agrees with this view. one reason people have woken up to theproblem of pollution is that it brings costs of its own thatundermine any economic benefits that come about by polluting. take oil spills for example. they can happen if tankers are toopoorly built to survive accidents at sea. but the economic benefit ofcompromising on tanker quality brings an economic cost when an oilspill occurs. the oil can wash up on nearby beaches devastate the ecosystem and severely affect tourism. the main problem is that the people whobear the cost of the spill arenot the people who caused the problem in the first place. yet arguably everyone who puts gasoline into their caror uses almost any kind of petroleum fueledtransportcontributes to the problem in some way. so oil spills are aproblem for everyone not just people who live by the coast and tankeroperates. sewage is another good example of how pollution can affect us all. sewage discharged into coastal waters can wash up on beaches and causea health hazard. people who bathe or surf in the water can fall ill ifthey swallow polluted wateryet sewage can have other harmful effectstoo it can poison shellfish that grownear the shore. people who eat poisoned shellfish risk suffering froman acuteand sometimes fatalillness called paralytic shellfishpoisoning. shellfish is no longer caught along many shores becauseit is simply too polluted with sewage or toxic chemical wastes thathave discharged from the land nearby. pollution matters because it harms the environment on which peopledepend. the environment is not something distant and separate from ourlives. its not a pretty shoreline hundreds of miles from our homes ora wilderness landscape that we see only on tv. the environment iseverything that surrounds us that gives us life and health. destroyingthe environment ultimately reduces the quality of our own livesandthat most selfishly is why pollution should matter to all of us. there is no easy way to solve water pollution if there were itwouldnt be so much of a problem. broadly speaking there are threedifferent things that can help to tackle the problemeducation laws and economicsand they work together as a team. making people aware of the problem is the first step to solving it. in the early s when surfers in britain grew tired of catching illnessesfrom water polluted with sewage they formed a group called surfersagainst sewage to force governments and water companies to clean uptheir act. people whove grown tired of walking the worlds pollutedbeaches often band together to organize community beach cleaningsessions. anglers who no longer catch so many fish have campaigned fortougher penalties against factories that pour pollution into ourrivers. greater public awareness can make a positive difference. one of the biggest problems with water pollution is itstransboundary nature. many rivers cross countries while seas spanwhole continents. pollution discharged by factories in one country withpoor environmental standards can cause problems in neighboringnations even when they have tougher laws and higher standards. environmental laws can make it tougher for people to pollute but to bereally effective they have to operate across national and internationalborders. this is why we have international laws governing the oceans such as the un convention on the law of the sea the london convention the marpol international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships and the ospar convention for the protection of the marineenvironment of the north east atlantic. the european union haswater protection laws that apply to all of itsmember states. they include the bathing water directive which seeks to ensure the quality of the waters that people use forrecreation. most countries also have their own water pollution laws. inthe united states for example there is thelean water actand the safe drinking water act. most environmental experts agree that the best way to tacklepollution is through something called the polluter pays principle. this means that whoever causes pollution should have to pay to clean itup one way or another. polluter pays can operate in all kinds of ways. it could mean that tanker owners should have to take out insurance thatcovers the cost of oil spill cleanups for example. it could also meanthat shoppers should have to pay for their plastic grocery bags as isnow common in ireland to encourage recycling and minimize waste. or itcould mean that factories that use rivers must have their water inletpipes downstream of their effluent outflow pipes so if they causepollution they themselves are the first people to suffer. ultimately the polluter pays principle is designed to deter people from pollutingby making it less expensive for them to behave in an environmentallyresponsible way. life is ultimately about choicesand so is pollution. we can livewith sewage strewn beaches dead rivers and fish that are toopoisonous to eat. or we can work together to keep the environment cleanso the plants animals and people who depend on it remain healthy. wecan take individual action to help reduce water pollution for example by using environmentally friendly detergents not pouring oil downdrains reducing pesticides and so on. we can take community actiontoo by helping out on beach cleans or litter picks to keep our riversand seas that little bit cleaner. and we can take action as countriesand continents to pass laws that will make pollution harder and theworld less polluted. working together we can make pollution less of aproblemand the world a better place. wherever possible ive referenced my sources with links the following notes are mostly references to books journals and other offline reports that cant be linked the same way. please do not copy our articles onto blogs and other websitesarticles from this website are registered at the us copyright office. copying or otherwise using registered works without permission removing this or other copyright notices and or infringing related rights could make you liable to severe civil or criminal penalties. text copyright chris woodford. all rights reserved. full copyright notice and terms of use. this article was originally written for the uk rivers network and first published on their website in april. it is revised and updated every year. please rate or give feedback on this page and i will make a donation to wateraid. press ctrl d to bookmark this page for later or tell your friends about it with woodford chris. water pollution. retrieved from https www. explainthatstuff. com waterpollution. html. water pollution has been documented as a contributor to a wide range of health problems and disorders in humans. it has also been shown to have drastically negative impacts on wild animals and the environment as a whole. there are quite a few different effects of the types of water pollution that are of significant importance to humans. water pollution can pose health dangers to humans who come into contact with it either directly or indirectly. the risks of your health being negatively impacted by polluted drinking water in a developed country is small in comparison with developing countries. however it is possible to become ill from contaminated water. when you are out hiking you can acquire giardiasis that can lead to the presentation of acute symptoms like vomiting and intense nausea. this infection is caused by drinking water that has been fouled by animal wastes in untreated waterways. in anthropogenic environments like cities and towns the potential toxins are far more numerous. the effects of agricultural runoff and land pollution have on waterways rivers streams and ultimately the ocean introduces toxic chemcials and livestock waste into water supplies and the ocean. hurricane damage and flooding of farms and farmlands have resulted in an ever increasing amount of toxic pollutants in water to the detriment of human marine and aquatic life. health risks from pollution vary from area to area. one of the most pervasive non localized water pollution issues facing the world today is the level of mercury in the oceans. inorganic mercury is a common byproduct of a number of industrial processes. the level of mercury in fish is mostly dangerous for small children and women who might become pregnant are pregnant or are nursing. mercury has been found to interfere with the development of the central nervous system in fetuses and young children which could potentially lead to a large amount of long term side effects. in louisiana water quality can be so bad in many waterways that fish advisories are often posted. people are warned against eating fish from these contaminated waterways. this is largely due to industrial runoff from localized sources and the accumulative effects of runoff and dumping from states that lie along the mississippi river. when the river empties into louisiana it brings those accumulated toxins with it. this is believed to lead to higher rates of cancer in areas surrounding the mississippi delta in an area that is colloquially referred to as cancer alley. phosphorous runoff from industry can get into waterways and create toxic algal blooms. these blooms have been linked to higher occurrences of paralytic shellfish poisoning in humans which can lead to death. according to the national park service the minnesota pollution control agency has taken on the project to clean up the mississippi river. the ambitious goal is to restore the river so it is once more fishable and swimmable. the mpca has teamed up with numerous partners to work on cleaning up the mississippi river and warns it will take several years to undo decades of damage. water pollution also causes negative effects within the environment to animals and their habitats. the entrance of pollutants into waterways can have a wide range of impacts. it is possible for the pollutants to raise the temperature of the water enough to force fish out in search of cooler waters. this can itself create an ecological deadzone. water pollution can also significantly increase the rate of algal blooms. these blooms create massive fish die offs as the oxygen in the water gets depleted and the fish suffocate. fish can also be killed when excessive algae get caught in their gills. oil spills are a common occurrence throughout the world however major spills like the exxon valdez and the bp deepwater horizon disaster have shown what water pollution can do on a very large scale. it was found that dolphins have been dying in record numbers near the site of the bp deepwater horizon disaster. it has also been found that the oil from the bp disaster has gotten into wetlands which are considered the nursery for nearly every creature that lives in the area. the effects of water pollution are not always immediate. they arent always seen at the point of contamination. they are sometimes never known by the person responsible for the pollution. however water pollution has a huge impact on the lives of all people. with knowledge consideration and preparation water pollution can be decreased. it doesnt take much effort just a little thought. our editors will review what you ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. water pollution is the release of substances into bodies of water that makes water unsafe for human use and disrupts aquatic ecosystems. water pollution can be caused by a plethora of different contaminants including toxic waste petroleum and disease causing microorganisms. human activities that generate domestic sewage and toxic waste cause water pollution by contaminating water with disease causing microorganisms and poisonous substances. oil spills are another source of water pollution that have devastating impacts on surrounding ecosystems. sewage can promote algae growth which can eventually result in eutrophic dead zones where aquatic life can not survive because of a lack of oxygen. microplastics are often found in marine wildlife and can become concentrated in humans who consume seafood because of biomagnification. oil spills such as the deepwater horizon oil spill in strand and kill many different marine species. while some studies point to human activity as a catalyst for red tide scientists are unsure about its cause. red tide is a common term for harmful algal blooms that often poison or kill wildlife and humans who consume contaminated seafood. red tides can severely impact ecosystems and local economies. water pollution the release of substances into subsurface groundwater or into lakes streams rivers estuaries and oceans to the point where the substances interfere with beneficial use of the water or with the natural functioning of ecosystems. in addition to the release of substances such as chemicals or microorganisms water pollution may also include the release of energy in the form of radioactivity or heat into bodies of water. water bodies can be polluted by a wide variety of substances including pathogenic microorganisms putrescible organic waste plant nutrients toxic chemicals sediments heat petroleum and radioactive substances. several types of water pollutants are considered below. domestic sewage is the primary source of pathogens and putrescible organic substances. because pathogens are excreted in feces all sewage from cities and towns is likely to contain pathogens of some type potentially presenting a direct threat to public health. putrescible organic matter presents a different sort of threat to water quality. as organics are decomposed naturally in the sewage by bacteria and other microorganisms the dissolved oxygen content of the water is depleted. this endangers the quality of lakes and streams where high levels of oxygen are required for fish and other aquatic organisms to survive. sewage treatment processes reduce the levels of pathogens and organics in wastewater but they do not eliminate them completely. domestic sewage is also a major source of plant nutrients mainly nitrates and phosphates. excess nitrates and phosphates in water promote the growth of algae sometimes causing unusually dense and rapid growths known as algal blooms. when the algae die oxygen dissolved in the water declines because microorganisms use oxygen to digest algae during the process of decomposition. anaerobic organisms then metabolize the organic wastes releasing gases such as methane and hydrogen sulfide which are harmful to the aerobic forms of life. the process by which a lake changes from a clean clear conditionwith a relatively low concentration of dissolved nutrients and a balanced aquatic communityto a nutrient rich algae filled state and thence to an oxygen deficient waste filled condition is called eutrophication. eutrophication is a naturally occurring slow and inevitable process. however when it is accelerated by human activity and water pollution it can lead to the premature aging and death of a body of water. waste is considered toxic if it is poisonous radioactive explosive carcinogenic mutagenic teratogenic or bioaccumulative. sources of toxic chemicals include improperly disposed wastewater from industrial plants and chemical process facilities as well as surface runoff containing pesticides used on agricultural areas and suburban lawns. sediment resulting from soil erosion can be carried into water bodies by surface runoff. suspended sediment interferes with the penetration of sunlight and upsets the ecological balance of a body of water. also it can disrupt the reproductive cycles of fish and other forms of life and when it settles out of suspension it can smother bottom dwelling organisms. heat is considered to be a water pollutant because it decreases the capacity of water to hold dissolved oxygen in solution and it increases the rate of metabolism of fish. valuable species of game fish can not survive in water with very low levels of dissolved oxygen. a major source of heat is the practice of discharging cooling water from power plants into rivers the discharged water may be as much as c warmer than the naturally occurring water. petroleum pollution occurs when oil from roads and parking lots is carried in surface runoff into water bodies. accidental oil spills are also a source of oil pollutionas in the devastating spills from the tanker exxon valdez and from the deepwater horizon oil rig. oil slicks eventually move toward shore harming aquatic life and damaging recreation areas. groundwaterwater contained in underground geologic formations called aquifersis a source of drinking water for many people. for example about half the people in the united states depend on groundwater for their domestic water supply. although groundwater may appear crystal clear it may still be polluted by dissolved chemicals and by bacteria and viruses. sources of chemical contaminants include poorly designed or poorly maintained subsurface sewage disposal systems industrial wastes disposed of in improperly lined or unlined landfills or lagoons leachates from unlined municipal refuse landfills mining and petroleum production and leaking underground storage tanks below gasoline service stations. in coastal areas increasing withdrawal of groundwater can cause saltwater intrusion as the water table drops seawater is drawn into wells. although estuaries and oceans contain vast volumes of water their natural capacity to absorb pollutants is limited. contamination from sewage outfall pipes from dumping of sludge or other wastes and from oil spills can harm marine life especially microscopic phytoplankton that serve as food for larger aquatic organisms. sometimes unsightly and dangerous waste materials can be washed back to shore littering beaches with hazardous debris. by an estimated. million and. million tonnes of plastic debris had been dumped into the oceans annually and floating plastic waste had accumulated in earth s five subtropical gyres that cover percent of the world s oceans. another ocean pollution problem is the seasonal formation of dead zones in certain coastal areas. the cause is nutrient enrichment from dispersed agricultural runoff and concomitant algal blooms. dead zones occur worldwide one of the largest of these forms annually in the gulf of mexico beginning at the mississippi river delta. water pollutants come from either point sources or dispersed sources. a point source is a pipe or channel such as those used for discharge from an industrial facility or a city sewerage system. a dispersed source is a very broad unconfined area from which a variety of pollutants enter the water body such as the runoff from an agricultural area. point sources of water pollution are easier to control than dispersed sources because the contaminated water has been collected and conveyed to one single point where it can be treated. pollution from dispersed sources is difficult to control and despite much progress in the building of modern sewage treatment plants dispersed sources continue to cause a large fraction of water pollution problems. although pure water is rarely found in nature the characterization of water quality is a function of the intended use of the water. for example water that is clean enough for swimming and fishing may not be clean enough for drinking and cooking. water quality standards provide a legal framework for the prevention of water pollution of all types. there are several types of water quality standards. stream standards are those that classify streams rivers and lakes on the basis of their maximum beneficial use they set allowable levels of specific substances or qualities allowed in those bodies of water based on their given classification. effluent standards set specific limits on the levels of contaminants allowed in the final discharges from wastewater treatment plants. drinking water standards include limits on the levels of specific contaminants allowed in potable water delivered to homes for domestic use. in the united states the clean water act and its amendments regulate water quality and set minimum standards for waste discharges for each industry as well as regulations for specific problems such as toxic chemicals and oil spills. in the european union water quality is governed by the water framework directive the drinking water directive and other laws. humans are increasingly influencing the climate and the earths temperature by burning fossil fuels cutting down forests and farming livestock. this adds enormous amounts of greenhouse gases to those naturally occurring in the atmosphere increasing the greenhouse effect and global warming. the main driver of climate change is the greenhouse effect. some gases in the earths atmosphere act a bit like the glass in a greenhouse trapping the suns heat and stopping it from leaking back into space and causing global warming. many of these greenhouse gases occur naturally but human activity is increasing the concentrations of some of them in the atmosphere in particular co produced by human activities is the largest contributor to global warming. by its concentration in the atmosphere had risen to above its pre industrial level. other greenhouse gases are emitted by human activity in smaller quantities. methane is a more powerful greenhouse gas than co but has a shorter atmospheric lifetime. nitrous oxide like co is a long lived greenhouse gas that accumulates in the atmosphere over decades to centuries. natural causes such as changes in solar radiation or volcanic activity are estimated to have contributed less than plus or minus. c to total warming between and. was the warmest decade recorded with global average temperature reaching. c above pre industrial levels in. human induced global warming is presently increasing at a rate of. c per decade. an increase of compared to the temperature in pre industrial times is associated with serious negative impacts on to the natural environment and human health and wellbeing including a much higher risk that dangerous and possibly catastrophic changes in the global environment will occur. for this reason the international community has recognised the need to keep warming well below and pursue efforts to limit it to. c. share this page models that account only for the effects of natural processes are not able to explain the warming observed over the past century. models that also account for the greenhouse gases emitted by humans are able to explain this warming. click the image to view a larger version. earths temperature depends on the balance between energy entering and leaving the planets system. when incoming energy from the sun is absorbed by the earth system earth warms. when the suns energy is reflected back into space earth avoids warming. when absorbed energy is released back into space earth cools. many factors both natural and human can cause changes in earths energy balance including these factors have caused earths climate to change many times. scientists have pieced together a record of earths climate dating back hundreds of thousands of years by analyzing a number of indirect measures of climate such as ice cores tree rings glacier lengths pollen remains and ocean sediments and by studying changes in earths orbit around the sun. this record shows that the climate system varies naturally over a wide range of time scales. in general climate changes prior to the industrial revolution in the s can be explained by natural causes such as changes in solar energy volcanic eruptions and natural changes in greenhouse gas concentrations. recent climate changes however can not be explained by natural causes alone. research indicates that natural causes do not explain most observed warming especially warming since the mid century. rather it is extremely likely that human activities have been the dominant cause of that warming. top of pageradiative forcing is a measure of the influence of a particular factor on the net change in earths energy balance. on average a positive radiative forcing tends to warm the surface of the planet while a negative forcing tends to cool the surface. ghgs have a positive forcing because they absorb energy radiating from earths surface rather than allowing it to be directly transmitted into space. this warms the atmosphere like a blanket. aerosols or small particles can have a positive or negative radiative forcing depending on how they absorb and emit heat or reflect light. for example black carbon aerosols have a positive forcing since they absorb sunlight. sulfate aerosols have a negative forcing since they reflect sunlight back into space. noaas annual ghg index which tracks changes in radiative forcing from ghgs over time shows that such forcing from human added ghgs has increased. percent between and. increases in co in the atmosphere are responsible for of the increase. the contribution to radiative forcing by ch and cfcs has been nearly constant or declining respectively in recent years. when sunlight reaches earths surface it can either be reflected back into space or absorbed by earth. once absorbed the planet releases some of the energy back into the atmosphere as heat. greenhouse gases like water vapor carbon dioxide and methane absorb energy slowing or preventing the loss of heat to space. in this way ghgs act like a blanket making earth warmer than it would otherwise be. this process is commonly known as the greenhouse effect. over the last several hundred thousand years co levels varied in tandem with the glacial cycles. during warm interglacial periods co levels were higher. during cool glacial periods co levels were lower. the heating or cooling of earths surface and oceans can cause changes in the natural sources and sinks of these gases and thus change greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. these changing concentrations are thought to have acted as a positive feedback amplifying the temperature changes caused by long term shifts in earths orbit. estimates of the earth s changing co concentration and antarctic temperature based on analysis of ice core data extending back years. until the past century natural factors caused atmospheric co concentrations to vary within a range of about to parts per million by volume. warmer periods coincide with periods of relatively high co concentrations. note the past century s temperature changes and rapid co rise are not shown here. increases over the past half century are shown in the recent role section. click the image to view a larger version. source based on data appearing in nrc. climate feedbacks amplify or reduce direct warming and cooling effects. they do not change the planets temperature directly. feedbacks that amplify changes are called positive feedbacks. feedbacks that counteract changes are called negative feedbacks. feedbacks are associated with changes in surface reflectivity clouds water vapor and the carbon cycle. water vapor appears to cause the most important positive feedback. as earth warms the rate of evaporation and the ability of air to hold water vapor both rise increasing the amount of water vapor in the air. because water vapor is a greenhouse gas this leads to further warming. the melting of arctic sea ice is another example of a positive climate feedback. as temperatures rise sea ice retreats. the loss of ice exposes the underlying sea surface which is darker and absorbs more sunlight than ice increasing the total amount of warming. some types of clouds cause a negative feedback. warming temperatures can increase the amount or reflectivity of these clouds reflecting more sunlight back into space cooling the surface of the planet. other types of clouds however contribute a positive feedback. there are also several positive feedbacks that increase ghg concentrations. for example as temperatures warm these changes lead to higher concentrations of atmospheric ghgs and contribute to increased warming. since the industrial revolution began around human activities have contributed substantially to climate change by adding co and other heat trapping gases to the atmosphere. these greenhouse gas emissions have increased the greenhouse effect and caused earths surface temperature to rise. the primary human activity affecting the amount and rate of climate change is greenhouse gas emissions from the burning of fossil fuels. the most important ghgs directly emitted by humans include carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide and several others. the sources and recent trends of these gases are detailed below. carbon dioxide is the primary greenhouse gas that is contributing to recent climate change. co is absorbed and emitted naturally as part of the carbon cycle through plant and animal respiration volcanic eruptions and ocean atmosphere exchange. human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels and changes in land use release large amounts of co causing concentrations in the atmosphere to rise. atmospheric co concentrations have increased by more than since pre industrial times from approximately parts per million by volume in the century to over ppmv in. the monthly average concentration at mauna loa now exceeds ppmv for the first time in human history. the current co level is higher than it has been in at least years. some volcanic eruptions released large quantities of co in the distant past. however the u. s. geological survey reports that human activities now emit more than times as much co as volcanoes each year. human activities currently release over billion tons of co into the atmosphere every year. the resultant build up of co in the atmosphere is like a tub filling with water where more water flows from the faucet than the drain can take away. for more information on the human and natural sources and sinks of co emissions and actions that can reduce emissions see the carbon dioxide page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. methane is produced through both natural and human activities. for example natural wetlands agricultural activities and fossil fuel extraction and transport all emit ch. methane is more abundant in earths atmosphere now than at any time in at least the past years. due to human activities ch concentrations increased sharply during most of the century and are now more than two and a half times pre industrial levels. in recent decades the rate of increase has slowed considerably. for more information on ch emissions and sources and actions that can reduce emissions see epas methane page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. for information on how methane is impacting the arctic see the epa report methane and black carbon impacts on the arctic. nitrous oxide is produced through natural and human activities mainly through agricultural activities and natural biological processes. fuel burning and some other processes also create no. concentrations of no have risen approximately since the start of the industrial revolution with a relatively rapid increase toward the end of the century. overall no concentrations have increased more rapidly during the past century than at any time in the past years. for more information on no emissions and sources and actions that can reduce emissions see epas nitrous oxide page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. for more information on greenhouse gas emissions see the greenhouse gas emissions website including an expanded discussion of global warming potentials and how they are used to measure the relative strengths of greenhouse gases. to learn more about actions that can reduce these emissions see what you can do. particles and aerosols in the atmosphere can also affect climate. human activities such as burning fossil fuels and biomass contribute to emissions of these substances although some aerosols also come from natural sources such as volcanoes and marine plankton. for more information on greenhouse gas emissions see the greenhouse gas emissions website. to learn more about actions that can reduce these emissions see what epa is doing and what you can do. top of pagethe sun s energy received at the top of earth s atmosphere has been measured by satellites since. it has followed its natural year cycle of small ups and downs but with no net increase. over the same period global temperature has risen markedly. click the image to view a larger version. source usgcrp. climate is influenced by natural changes that affect how much solar energy reaches earth. these changes include changes within the sun and changes in earths orbit. changes occurring in the sun itself can affect the intensity of the sunlight that reaches earths surface. the intensity of the sunlight can cause either warming or cooling. the sun follows a natural year cycle of small ups and downs in intensity but the effect on earths climate is small. changes in the shape of earths orbit as well as the tilt and position of earths axis can also affect the amount of sunlight reaching earths surface. changes in the suns intensity have influenced earths climate in the past. for example the so called little ice age between the and centuries may have been partially caused by a low solar activity phase from to which coincided with cooler temperatures. the little ice age refers to a slight cooling of north america europe and probably other areas around the globe. changes in earths orbit have had a big impact on climate over tens to hundreds of thousands of years. in fact the amount of summer sunshine on the northern hemisphere which is affected by changes in the planets orbit appears to drive the advance and retreat of ice sheets. these changes appear to be the primary cause of past cycles of ice ages in which earth has experienced long periods of cold temperatures as well as shorter interglacial periods of relatively warmer temperatures. click to learn about how rates of climate change have varied over time. changes in solar energy continue to affect climate. however over the last year solar cycle solar output has been lower than it has been since the mid century and therefore does not explain the recent warming of the earth. similarly changes in the shape of earths orbit as well as the tilt and position of earths axis affect temperature on very long timescales and therefore can not explain the recent warming. when sunlight reaches earth it can be reflected or absorbed. the amount that is reflected or absorbed depends on earths surface and atmosphere. light colored objects and surfaces like snow and clouds tend to reflect most sunlight while darker objects and surfaces like the ocean forests or soil tend to absorb more sunlight. the term albedo refers to the amount of solar radiation reflected from an object or surface often expressed as a percentage. earth as a whole has an albedo of about meaning that of the sunlight that reaches the planet is absorbed. absorbed sunlight warms earths land water and atmosphere. reflectivity is also affected by aerosols. aerosols are small particles or liquid droplets in the atmosphere that can absorb or reflect sunlight. unlike greenhouse gases the climate effects of aerosols vary depending on what they are made of and where they are emitted. those aerosols that reflect sunlight such as particles from volcanic eruptions or sulfur emissions from burning coal have a cooling effect. those that absorb sunlight such as black carbon have a warming effect. natural changes in reflectivity like the melting of sea ice have contributed to climate change in the past often acting as feedbacks to other processes. volcanoes have played a noticeable role in climate. volcanic particles that reach the upper atmosphere can reflect enough sunlight back to space to cool the surface of the planet by a few tenths of a degree for several years. these particles are an example of cooling aerosols. volcanic particles from a single eruption do not produce long term change because they remain in the atmosphere for a much shorter time than ghgs. human changes in land use and land cover have changed earths reflectivity. processes such as deforestation reforestation desertification and urbanization often contribute to changes in climate in the places they occur. these effects may be significant regionally but are smaller when averaged over the entire globe. in addition human activities have generally increased the number of aerosol particles in the atmosphere. overall human generated aerosols have a net cooling effect offsetting about one third of the total warming effect associated with human greenhouse gas emissions. reductions in overall aerosol emissions can therefore lead to more warming. however targeted reductions in black carbon emissions can reduce warming. top of page usgcrp. climate change impacts in the united states the third national climate assessment. richmond and gary w. yohe eds. u. s. global change research program. ipcc. climate change the physical science basis. contribution of working group i to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. cambridge university press cambridge united kingdom and new york ny usa. nrc. advancing the science of climate changes. national research council. the national academies press washington dc usa. top of pagestudies of earths past climate suggest periods of relative stability as well as periods of rapid change. periods of relative stability interglacial climate periods such as the present tend to be more stable than cooler glacial climates. for example earths climate during the current interglacial period is more stable than the most recent glacial period. the glacial period was characterized by widespread large and abrupt climate changes. in contrast the previous interglacial period was similarly stable. periods of abrupt climate change abrupt climate change refers to sudden large changes in some major component of the climate system with rapid widespread effects. abrupt or rapid climate changes tend to frequently accompany transitions between glacial and interglacial periods. for example a significant part of the northern hemisphere particularly around greenland may have experienced very rapid warming of f f over several decades during and after the most recent ice age. abrupt climate changes occur when a threshold or tipping point in the climate system is crossed causing large changes or impacts to the climate. scientific data show that abrupt changes in climate at the regional scale have occurred throughout history and are characteristic of earths climate system. warming from greenhouse gas emissions as well as other human changes to the earth system may increase the possibility of large and abrupt regional or global climatic events. contact us to ask a question provide feedback or report a problem. last updated on december ontemporary climate change includes both the global warming caused by humans and its impacts on earths weather patterns. there have been previous periods of climate change but the current changes are more rapid than any known events in earths history. the main cause is the emission of greenhouse gases mostly carbon dioxide and methane. burning fossil fuels for energy use creates most of these emissions. agriculture steel making cement production and forest loss are additional sources. temperature rise is also affected by climate feedbacks such as the loss of sunlight reflecting snow cover and the release of carbon dioxide from drought stricken forests. collectively these amplify global warming. on land temperatures have risen about twice as fast as the global average. deserts are expanding while heat waves and wildfires are becoming more common. increased warming in the arctic has contributed to melting permafrost glacial retreat and sea ice loss. higher temperatures are also causing more intense storms and other weather extremes. in places such as coral reefs mountains and the arctic many species are forced to relocate or become extinct as their environment changes. climate change threatens people with food and water scarcity increased flooding extreme heat more disease and economic loss. it can also drive human migration. the world health organization calls climate change the greatest threat to global health in the century. even if efforts to minimise future warming are successful some effects will continue for centuries. these include sea level rise and warmer more acidic oceans. many of these impacts are already felt at the current level of warming which is about. c. the intergovernmental panel on climate change projects even greater impacts as warming continues to. c and beyond. additional warming also increases the risk of triggering tipping points such as the melting of the greenland ice sheet. responding to these changes involves taking actions to limit the amount of warming and adapting to them. future warming can be reduced by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and removing them from the atmosphere. this will involve using more wind and solar energy phasing out coal and increasing energy efficiency. switching to electric vehicles to public transport and to heat pumps for homes and commercial buildings would further limit emissions. prevention of deforestation and enhancing forests can help absorb co. some communities may adapt to climate change through better coastline protection disaster management and development of more resistant crops. by themselves these efforts to adapt can not avert the risk of severe widespread and permanent impacts. under the paris agreement nations collectively agreed to keep warming well under c through mitigation efforts. however with pledges made under the agreement global warming would still reach about. c by the end of the century. limiting warming to. c would require halving emissions by and achieving net zero emissions by. before the s it was unclear whether warming by greenhouse gases would dominate aerosol induced cooling. scientists then often used the term inadvertent climate modification to refer to the human impact on the climate. in the s the terms global warming and climate change were popularised. the former refers only to increased surface warming the latter describes the full effect of greenhouse gases on the climate. global warming became the most popular term after nasa climate scientist james hansen used it in his testimony in the u. s. senate. in the s the term climate change increased in popularity. global warming usually refers to human induced warming of the earth system whereas climate change can refer to natural or anthropogenic change. the two terms are often used interchangeably. various scientists politicians and media figures have adopted the terms climate crisis or climate emergency to talk about climate change and global heating instead of global warming. the policy editor in chief of the guardian said they included this language in their editorial guidelines to ensure that we are being scientifically precise while also communicating clearly with readers on this very important issue. in oxford languages chose climate emergency as its word of the year defining it as a situation in which urgent action is required to reduce or halt climate change and avoid potentially irreversible environmental damage resulting from it. multiple independent instrumental datasets show that the climate system is warming. the decade warmed. c compared to the pre industrial baseline. surface temperatures are rising by about. c per decade with reaching a temperature of. c above pre industrial. since the number of cold days and nights has decreased and the number of warm days and nights has increased. there was little net warming between the century and the mid century. climate information for that period comes from climate proxies such as trees and ice cores. they show that natural variations offset the early effects of the industrial revolution. thermometer records began to provide global coverage around. historical patterns of warming and cooling like the medieval climate anomaly and the little ice age did not occur at the same time across different regions. temperatures may have reached as high as those of the late century in a limited set of regions. there have been prehistorical episodes of global warming such as the paleoceneeocene thermal maximum. however the modern observed rise in temperature and co concentrations has been so rapid that even abrupt geophysical events in earths history do not approach current rates. evidence of warming from air temperature measurements are reinforced with a wide range of other observations. there has been an increase in the frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation melting of snow and land ice and increased atmospheric humidity. flora and fauna are also behaving in a manner consistent with warming for instance plants are flowering earlier in spring. another key indicator is the cooling of the upper atmosphere which demonstrates that greenhouse gases are trapping heat near the earths surface and preventing it from radiating into space. regions warm at various rates. the pattern is independent of where greenhouse gases are emitted because the gases persist long enough to diffuse across the planet. since the pre industrial period the average surface temperature over land regions has increased almost twice as fast as the global average surface temperature. this is because of the larger heat capacity of oceans and because oceans lose more heat by evaporation. the thermal energy in the global climate system has grown with only brief pauses since at least and over of this extra energy has been stored in the ocean. the rest has heated the atmosphere melted ice and warmed the continents. the northern hemisphere and the north pole have warmed much faster than the south pole and southern hemisphere. the northern hemisphere not only has much more land but also more seasonal snow cover and sea ice. as these surfaces flip from reflecting a lot of light to being dark after the ice has melted they start absorbing more heat. local black carbon deposits on snow and ice also contribute to arctic warming. arctic temperatures are increasing at over twice the rate of the rest of the world. melting of glaciers and ice sheets in the arctic disrupts ocean circulation including a weakened gulf stream further changing the climate. the climate system experiences various cycles on its own which can last for years decades or even centuries. other changes are caused by an imbalance of energy that is external to the climate system but not always external to the earth. examples of external forcings include changes in the concentrations of greenhouse gases solar luminosity volcanic eruptions and variations in the earths orbit around the sun. to determine the human contribution to climate change known internal climate variability and natural external forcings need to be ruled out. a key approach is to determine unique fingerprints for all potential causes then compare these fingerprints with observed patterns of climate change. for example solar forcing can be ruled out as a major cause. its fingerprint would be warming in the entire atmosphere. yet only the lower atmosphere has warmed consistent with greenhouse gas forcing. attribution of recent climate change shows that the main driver is elevated greenhouse gases but that aerosols also have a strong effect. the earth absorbs sunlight then radiates it as heat. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb and reemit infrared radiation slowing the rate at which it can pass through the atmosphere and escape into space. before the industrial revolution naturally occurring amounts of greenhouse gases caused the air near the surface to be about c warmer than it would have been in their absence. while water vapour and clouds are the biggest contributors to the greenhouse effect they increase as a function of temperature and are therefore feedbacks. on the other hand concentrations of gases such as co tropospheric ozone cfcs and nitrous oxide are not temperature dependent and are therefore external forcings. human activity since the industrial revolution mainly extracting and burning fossil fuels has increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere resulting in a radiative imbalance. in the concentrations of co and methane had increased by about and respectively since. these co levels are higher than they have been at any time during the last million years. concentrations of methane are far higher than they were over the last years. global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in excluding those from land use change were equivalent to billion tonnes of co. of these emissions was co was methane was nitrous oxide and was fluorinated gases. co emissions primarily come from burning fossil fuels to provide energy for transport manufacturing heating and electricity. additional co emissions come from deforestation and industrial processes which include the co released by the chemical reactions for making cement steel aluminum and fertiliser. methane emissions come from livestock manure rice cultivation landfills wastewater and coal mining as well as oil and gas extraction. nitrous oxide emissions largely come from the microbial decomposition of inorganic and organic fertiliser. from a production standpoint the primary sources of global greenhouse gas emissions are estimated as electricity and heat agriculture and forestry industry and manufacturing transport and buildings. despite the contribution of deforestation to greenhouse gas emissions the earths land surface particularly its forests remain a significant carbon sink for co. natural processes such as carbon fixation in the soil and photosynthesis more than offset the greenhouse gas contributions from deforestation. the land surface sink is estimated to remove about of annual global co emissions. the ocean also serves as a significant carbon sink via a two step process. first co dissolves in the surface water. afterwards the oceans overturning circulation distributes it deep into the oceans interior where it accumulates over time as part of the carbon cycle. over the last two decades the worlds oceans have absorbed to of emitted co. air pollution in the form of aerosols not only puts a large burden on human health but also affects the climate on a large scale. from to a gradual reduction in the amount of sunlight reaching the earths surface was observed a phenomenon popularly known as global dimming typically attributed to aerosols from biofuel and fossil fuel burning. globally aerosols have been declining since meaning that they no longer mask greenhouse gas warming as much. aerosols scatter and absorb solar radiation. they also have indirect effects on the earths radiation budget. sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets. these clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets. they also reduce the growth of raindrops which makes clouds more reflective to incoming sunlight. indirect effects of aerosols are the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing. while aerosols typically limit global warming by reflecting sunlight black carbon in soot that falls on snow or ice can contribute to global warming. not only does this increase the absorption of sunlight it also increases melting and sea level rise. limiting new black carbon deposits in the arctic could reduce global warming by. c by. humans change the earths surface mainly to create more agricultural land. today agriculture takes up of earths land area while is forests and is uninhabitable. the amount of forested land continues to decrease largely due to conversion to cropland in the tropics. this deforestation is the most significant aspect of land surface change affecting global warming. the main causes of deforestation are permanent land use change from forest to agricultural land producing products such as beef and palm oil logging to produce forestry forest products short term shifting cultivation and wildfires. land use changes not only affect greenhouse gas emissions. the type of vegetation in a region affects the local temperature. it impacts how much of the sunlight gets reflected back into space and how much heat is lost by evaporation. for instance the change from a dark forest to grassland makes the surface lighter causing it to reflect more sunlight. deforestation can also affect temperatures by modifying the release of chemical compounds that influence clouds and by changing wind patterns. in tropic and temperate areas the net effect is to produce significant warming while at latitudes closer to the poles a gain of albedo leads to a cooling effect. globally these effects are estimated to have led to a slight cooling dominated by an increase in surface albedo. physical climate models are unable to reproduce the rapid warming observed in recent decades when taking into account only variations in solar output and volcanic activity. as the sun is the earths primary energy source changes in incoming sunlight directly affect the climate system. solar irradiance has been measured directly by satellites and indirect measurements are available from the early s onwards. there has been no upward trend in the amount of the suns energy reaching the earth. further evidence for greenhouse gases causing global warming comes from measurements that show a warming of the lower atmosphere coupled with a cooling of the upper atmosphere. if solar variations were responsible for the observed warming the troposphere and stratosphere would both warm. explosive volcanic eruptions represent the largest natural forcing over the industrial era. when the eruption is sufficiently strong sunlight can be partially blocked for a couple of years. the temperature signal lasts about twice as long. in the industrial era volcanic activity has had negligible impacts on global temperature trends. present day volcanic co emissions are equivalent to less than of current anthropogenic co emissions. the response of the climate system to an initial forcing is modified by feedbacks increased by self reinforcing feedbacks and reduced by balancing feedbacks. the main reinforcing feedbacks are the water vapour feedback the icealbedo feedback and probably the net effect of clouds. the primary balancing mechanism is radiative cooling as earths surface gives off more heat to space in response to rising temperature. in addition to temperature feedbacks there are feedbacks in the carbon cycle such as the fertilizing effect of co on plant growth. uncertainty over feedbacks is the major reason why different climate models project different magnitudes of warming for a given amount of emissions. as air gets warmer it can hold more moisture. after initial warming due to emissions of greenhouse gases the atmosphere will hold more water. water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas so this further heats the atmosphere. if cloud cover increases more sunlight will be reflected back into space cooling the planet. if clouds become higher and thinner they act as an insulator reflecting heat from below back downwards and warming the planet. overall the net cloud feedback over the industrial era has probably exacerbated temperature rise. the reduction of snow cover and sea ice in the arctic reduces the albedo of the earths surface. more of the suns energy is now absorbed in these regions contributing to amplification of arctic temperature changes. arctic amplification is also melting permafrost which releases methane and co into the atmosphere. around half of human caused co emissions have been absorbed by land plants and by the oceans. on land elevated co and an extended growing season have stimulated plant growth. climate change increases droughts and heat waves that inhibit plant growth which makes it uncertain whether this carbon sink will continue to grow in the future. soils contain large quantities of carbon and may release some when they heat up. as more co and heat are absorbed by the ocean it acidifies its circulation changes and phytoplankton takes up less carbon decreasing the rate at which the ocean absorbs atmospheric carbon. climate change can increase methane emissions from wetlands marine and freshwater systems and permafrost. future warming depends on the strengths of climate feedbacks and on emissions of greenhouse gases. the former are often estimated using climate models developed by multiple scientific institutions. a climate model is a representation of the physical chemical and biological processes that affect the climate system. models include changes in the earths orbit historical changes in the suns activity and volcanic forcing. computer models attempt to reproduce and predict the circulation of the oceans the annual cycle of the seasons and the flows of carbon between the land surface and the atmosphere. models project different future temperature rises for given emissions of greenhouse gases they do not fully agree on the strength of different feedbacks on climate sensitivity and magnitude of inertia of the climate system. the physical realism of models is tested by examining their ability to simulate contemporary or past climates. past models have underestimated the rate of arctic shrinkage and underestimated the rate of precipitation increase. sea level rise since was underestimated in older models but more recent models agree well with observations. the united states published national climate assessment notes that climate models may still be underestimating or missing relevant feedback processes. a subset of climate models add societal factors to a simple physical climate model. these models simulate how population economic growth and energy use affect and interact with the physical climate. with this information these models can produce scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions. this is then used as input for physical climate models to generate climate change projections. in some scenarios emissions continue to rise over the century while others have reduced emissions. fossil fuel resources are too abundant for shortages to be relied on to limit carbon emissions in the century. emissions scenarios can be combined with modelling of the carbon cycle to predict how atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases might change in the future. according to these combined models by the atmospheric concentration of co could be as low as or as high as ppm depending on the socioeconomic scenario and the mitigation scenario. the ipcc sixth assessment report projects that global warming is very likely to reach. c to. c by the late century under the very low ghg emissions scenario. in an intermediate scenario global warming would reach. c to. c and. c to. c under the very high ghg emissions scenario. these projections are based on climate models in combination with observations. the remaining carbon budget is determined by modelling the carbon cycle and the climate sensitivity to greenhouse gases. according to the ipcc global warming can be kept below. c with a two thirds chance if emissions after do not exceed or gigatonnes of co. this corresponds to to years of current emissions. there are high uncertainties about the budget. for instance it may be gigatonnes of co smaller due to methane release from permafrost and wetlands. the environmental effects of climate change are broad and far reaching affecting oceans ice and weather. changes may occur gradually or rapidly. evidence for these effects comes from studying climate change in the past from modelling and from modern observations. since the s droughts and heat waves have appeared simultaneously with increasing frequency. extremely wet or dry events within the monsoon period have increased in india and east asia. the rainfall rate and intensity of hurricanes and typhoons is likely increasing. frequency of tropical cyclones has not increased as a result of climate change. global sea level is rising as a consequence of glacial melt melt of the ice sheets in greenland and antarctica and thermal expansion. between and the rise increased over time averaging.. mm per year. over the century the ipcc projects that in a very high emissions scenario the sea level could rise by cm. increased ocean warmth is undermining and threatening to unplug antarctic glacier outlets risking a large melt of the ice sheet and the possibility of a meter sea level rise by under high emissions. climate change has led to decades of shrinking and thinning of the arctic sea ice. while ice free summers are expected to be rare at. c degrees of warming they are set to occur once every three to ten years at a warming level of c. higher atmospheric co concentrations have led to changes in ocean chemistry. an increase in dissolved co is causing oceans to acidify. in addition oxygen levels are decreasing as oxygen is less soluble in warmer water. dead zones in the ocean regions with very little oxygen are expanding too. the greater the amount of global warming the greater the risk of passing through tipping points thresholds beyond which certain impacts can no longer be avoided even if temperatures are reduced. an example is the collapse of west antarctic and greenland ice sheets where a temperature rise of. to c may commit the ice sheets to melt although the time scale of melt is uncertain and depends on future warming. some large scale changes could occur over a short time period such as a collapse of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation which would trigger major climate changes in the north atlantic europe and north america. the long term effects of climate change include further ice melt ocean warming sea level rise and ocean acidification. on the timescale of centuries to millennia the magnitude of climate change will be determined primarily by anthropogenic co emissions. this is due to cos long atmospheric lifetime. oceanic co uptake is slow enough that ocean acidification will continue for hundreds to thousands of years. these emissions are estimated to have prolonged the current interglacial period by at least years. sea level rise will continue over many centuries with an estimated rise of. metres per degree celsius after years. recent warming has driven many terrestrial and freshwater species poleward and towards higher altitudes. higher atmospheric co levels and an extended growing season have resulted in global greening. however heatwaves and drought have reduced ecosystem productivity in some regions. the future balance of these opposing effects is unclear. climate change has contributed to the expansion of drier climate zones such as the expansion of deserts in the subtropics. the size and speed of global warming is making abrupt changes in ecosystems more likely. overall it is expected that climate change will result in the extinction of many species. the oceans have heated more slowly than the land but plants and animals in the ocean have migrated towards the colder poles faster than species on land. just as on land heat waves in the ocean occur more frequently due to climate change harming a wide range of organisms such as corals kelp and seabirds. ocean acidification makes it harder for organisms such as mussels barnacles and corals to produce shells and skeletons and heatwaves have bleached coral reefs. harmful algal blooms enhanced by climate change and eutrophication lower oxygen levels disrupt food webs and cause great loss of marine life. coastal ecosystems are under particular stress. almost half of global wetlands have disappeared due to climate change and other human impacts. ecological collapse. bleaching has damaged the great barrier reef and threatens reefs worldwide. extreme weather. drought and high temperatures worsened the bushfires in australia. arctic warming. permafrost thaws undermine infrastructure and release methane a greenhouse gas. habitat destruction. many arctic animals rely on sea ice which has been disappearing in a warming arctic. pest propagation. mild winters allow more pine beetles to survive to kill large swaths of forest. the effects of climate change on humans mostly due to warming and shifts in precipitation have been detected worldwide. impacts are now observable on all continents and across ocean regions with low latitude less developed areas facing the greatest risk. continued warming has potentially severe pervasive and irreversible impacts for people and ecosystems. the risks are unevenly distributed but are generally greater for disadvantaged people in developing and developed countries. health impacts include both the direct effects of extreme weather leading to injury and loss of life and indirect effects such as undernutrition brought on by crop failures. various infectious diseases are more easily transmitted in a warmer climate such as dengue fever which affects children most severely and malaria. young children are the most vulnerable to food shortages and together with older people to extreme heat. the world health organization has estimated that between and climate change is expected to cause around additional deaths per year from heat exposure in elderly people increases in diarrheal disease malaria dengue coastal flooding and childhood undernutrition. over additional adult deaths are projected yearly by due to reductions in food availability and quality. other major health risks associated with climate change include air and water quality. the who has classified human impacts from climate change as the greatest threat to global health in the century. climate change is affecting food security. it has caused reduction in global mean yields of maize wheat and soybeans between and. future warming could further reduce global yields of major crops. crop production will probably be negatively affected in low latitude countries while effects at northern latitudes may be positive or negative. up to an additional million people worldwide particularly those with lower incomes are at risk of hunger as a consequence of these impacts. the effects of warming on the oceans impact fish stocks with a global decline in the maximum catch potential. only polar stocks are showing an increased potential. regions dependent on glacier water regions that are already dry and small islands are at increased risk of water stress due to climate change. economic damages due to climate change may be severe and there is a probability of disastrous tail risk events. climate change has likely already increased global economic inequality and this trend is projected to continue. most of the severe impacts are expected in sub saharan africa and south east asia where existing poverty is already exacerbated. the world bank estimates that climate change could drive over million people into poverty by. current inequalities between men and women between rich and poor and between different ethnicities have been observed to worsen as a consequence of climate variability and climate change. an expert elicitation concluded that the role of climate change in armed conflict has been small compared to factors such as socio economic inequality and state capabilities but that future warming will bring increasing risks. low lying islands and coastal communities are threatened through hazards posed by sea level rise such as flooding and permanent submergence. this could lead to statelessness for populations in island nations such as the maldives and tuvalu. in some regions rise in temperature and humidity may be too severe for humans to adapt to. with worst case climate change models project that almost one third of humanity might live in extremely hot and uninhabitable climates similar to the current climate found in the sahara. these factors plus weather extremes can drive environmental migration both within and between countries. displacement of people is expected to increase as a consequence of more frequent extreme weather sea level rise and conflict arising from increased competition over natural resources. climate change may also increase vulnerability leading to trapped populations who are not able to move due to a lack of resources. environmental migration. sparser rainfall leads to desertification that harms agriculture and can displace populations. shown telly mali. agricultural changes. droughts rising temperatures and extreme weather negatively impact agriculture. shown texas us. tidal flooding. sea level rise increases flooding in low lying coastal regions. shown venice italy. storm intensification. bangladesh after cyclone sidr is an example of catastrophic flooding from increased rainfall. heat wave intensification. events like the june european heat wave are becoming more common. climate change can be mitigated by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and by enhancing sinks that absorb greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. in order to limit global warming to less than. c with a high likelihood of success global greenhouse gas emissions needs to be net zero by or by with a c target. this requires far reaching systemic changes on an unprecedented scale in energy land cities transport buildings and industry. the united nations environment programme estimates that countries need to triple their pledges under the paris agreement within the next decade to limit global warming to c. an even greater level of reduction is required to meet the. c goal. with pledges made under the agreement as of october global warming would still have a chance of reaching about. c by the end of the century. although there is no single pathway to limit global warming to. or c most scenarios and strategies see a major increase in the use of renewable energy in combination with increased energy efficiency measures to generate the needed greenhouse gas reductions. to reduce pressures on ecosystems and enhance their carbon sequestration capabilities changes would also be necessary in agriculture and forestry such as preventing deforestation and restoring natural ecosystems by reforestation. other approaches to mitigating climate change have a higher level of risk. scenarios that limit global warming to. c typically project the large scale use of carbon dioxide removal methods over the century. there are concerns though about over reliance on these technologies and environmental impacts. solar radiation management is also a possible supplement to deep reductions in emissions. however srm would raise significant ethical and legal issues and the risks are poorly understood. renewable energy is key to limiting climate change. fossil fuels accounted for of the worlds energy in. the remaining share was split between nuclear power and renewables. that mix is projected to change significantly over the next years. solar and wind have seen substantial growth and progress over the last few years. solar panels and onshore wind are the cheapest forms of adding new power generation capacity in most countries. renewables represented of all new electricity generation installed in nearly all solar and wind. meanwhile nuclear power share remains the same but costs are increasing. nuclear power generation is now several times more expensive per megawatt hour than wind and solar. to achieve carbon neutrality by renewable energy would become the dominant form of electricity generation rising to or more by in some scenarios. the use of electricity for heating and transport would rise to the point where electricity becomes the largest form of energy. investment in coal would be eliminated and coal use nearly phased out by. in transport scenarios envision sharp increases in the market share of electric vehicles of public transport and of a switch to low carbon fuel for other transportation modes like shipping. heating would be increasingly decarbonised with the use of technologies like heat pumps. there are obstacles to the continued rapid growth of renewables. for solar and wind power a key challenge is their intermittency and seasonal variability. traditionally hydro dams with reservoirs and conventional power plants have been used when variable energy production is low. intermittency is further countered by expanding battery storage and matching energy demand and supply. long distance transmission can smooth variability of renewable output across wider geographic areas. there can be environmental and land use concerns with large solar and wind projects while bioenergy is often not carbon neutral and may have negative consequences for food security. hydropower growth has been slowing and is set to decline further due to concerns about social and environmental impacts. low carbon energy improves human health by minimising climate change and has the near term benefit of reducing air pollution deaths which were estimated at million annually in. meeting the paris agreement goals that limit warming to a c increase could save about a million of those lives per year by whereas limiting global warming to. c could save millions and simultaneously increase energy security and reduce poverty. reducing energy demand is another major aspect of reducing emissions. if less energy is needed there is more flexibility for clean energy development. it also makes it easier to manage the electricity grid and minimises carbon intensive infrastructure development. major increases in energy efficiency investment will be required to achieve climate goals comparable to the level of investment in renewable energy. several covid related changes in energy use patterns energy efficiency investments and funding have made forecasts for this decade more difficult and uncertain. strategies to reduce energy demand vary by sector. in transport passengers and freight can switch to more efficient travel modes such as buses and trains or use electric vehicles. industrial strategies to reduce energy demand include increasing the energy efficiency of heating systems and motors designing less energy intensive products and increasing product lifetimes. in the building sector the focus is on better design of new buildings and aiming for higher levels of energy efficiency in retrofitting. the use of technologies like heat pumps can also increase building energy efficiency. agriculture and forestry face a triple challenge of limiting greenhouse gas emissions preventing the further conversion of forests to agricultural land and meeting increases in world food demand. a set of actions could reduce agriculture and forestry based emissions by two thirds from levels. these include reducing growth in demand for food and other agricultural products increasing land productivity protecting and restoring forests and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural production. steel and cement production responsible for about of industrial co emissions present particular challenges. in these industries carbon intensive materials such as coke and lime play an integral role in the production so that reducing co emissions requires research into alternative chemistries. natural carbon sinks can be enhanced to sequester significantly larger amounts of co beyond naturally occurring levels. reforestation and tree planting on non forest lands are among the most mature sequestration techniques although the latter raises food security concerns. soil carbon sequestration and coastal carbon sequestration are less understood options. the feasibility of land based negative emissions methods for mitigation are uncertain the ipcc has described mitigation strategies based on them as risky. where energy production or co intensive heavy industries continue to produce waste co the gas can be captured and stored instead of released to the atmosphere. although its current use is limited in scale and expensive carbon capture and storage may be able to play a significant role in limiting co emissions by mid century. this technique in combination with bio energy can result in net negative emissions co is drawn from the atmosphere. it remains highly uncertain whether carbon dioxide removal techniques such as beccs will be able to play a large role in limiting warming to. c. policy decisions that rely on carbon dioxide removal increase the risk of global warming rising beyond international goals. adaptation is the process of adjustment to current or expected changes in climate and its effects. without additional mitigation adaptation can not avert the risk of severe widespread and irreversible impacts. more severe climate change requires more transformative adaptation which can be prohibitively expensive. the capacity and potential for humans to adapt is unevenly distributed across different regions and populations and developing countries generally have less. the first two decades of the century saw an increase in adaptive capacity in most low and middle income countries with improved access to basic sanitation and electricity but progress is slow. many countries have implemented adaptation policies. however there is a considerable gap between necessary and available finance. adaptation to sea level rise consists of avoiding at risk areas learning to live with increased flooding and protection. if that fails managed retreat may be needed. there are economic barriers for tackling dangerous heat impact. avoiding strenuous work or having air conditioning is not possible for everybody. in agriculture adaptation options include a switch to more sustainable diets diversification erosion control and genetic improvements for increased tolerance to a changing climate. insurance allows for risk sharing but is often difficult to get for people on lower incomes. education migration and early warning systems can reduce climate vulnerability. ecosystems adapt to climate change a process that can be supported by human intervention. by increasing connectivity between ecosystems species can migrate to more favourable climate conditions. species can also be directly moved. protection and restoration of natural and semi natural areas helps build resilience making it easier for ecosystems to adapt. many of the actions that promote adaptation in ecosystems also help humans adapt via ecosystem based adaptation. for instance restoration of natural fire regimes makes catastrophic fires less likely and reduces human exposure. giving rivers more space allows for more water storage in the natural system reducing flood risk. restored forest acts as a carbon sink but planting trees in unsuitable regions can exacerbate climate impacts. there are synergies and trade offs between adaptation and mitigation. adaptation often offer short term benefits whereas mitigation has longer term benefits. increased use of air conditioning allows people to better cope with heat but increases energy demand. compact urban development may lead to reduced emissions from transport and construction. at the same time it may increase the urban heat island effect leading to higher temperatures and increased exposure. increased food productivity has large benefits for both adaptation and mitigation. countries that are most vulnerable to climate change have typically been responsible for a small share of global emissions. this raises questions about justice and fairness. climate change is strongly linked to sustainable development. limiting global warming makes it easier to achieve sustainable development goals such as eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities. the connection is recognised in sustainable development goal which is to ake urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. the goals on food clean water and ecosystem protection have synergies with climate mitigation. the geopolitics of climate change is complex. it has often been framed as a free rider problem in which all countries benefit from mitigation done by other countries but individual countries would lose from switching to a low carbon economy themselves. this framing has been challenged. for instance the benefits of a coal phase out to public health and local environments exceed the costs in almost all regions. furthermore net importers of fossil fuels win economically from switching to clean energy causing net exporters to face stranded assets fossil fuels they can not sell. a wide range of policies regulations and laws are being used to reduce emissions. as of carbon pricing covers about of global greenhouse gas emissions. carbon can be priced with carbon taxes and emissions trading systems. direct global fossil fuel subsidies reached billion in and. trillion when indirect costs such as air pollution are priced in. ending these can cause a reduction in global carbon emissions and a reduction in air pollution deaths. subsidies could be used to support the transition to clean energy instead. more direct methods to reduce greenhouse gases include vehicle efficiency standards renewable fuel standards and air pollution regulations on heavy industry. several countries require utilities to increase the share of renewables in power production. policy designed through the lens of climate justice tries to address human rights issues and social inequality. for instance wealthy nations responsible for the largest share of emissions would have to pay poorer countries to adapt. as the use of fossil fuels is reduced jobs in the sector are being lost. to achieve a just transition these people would need to be retrained for other jobs. communities with many fossil fuel workers would need additional investments. nearly all countries in the world are parties to the united nations framework convention on climate change. the goal of the unfccc is to prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system. as stated in the convention this requires that greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilised in the atmosphere at a level where ecosystems can adapt naturally to climate change food production is not threatened and economic development can be sustained. the unfccc does not itself restrict emissions but rather provides a framework for protocols that do. global emissions have risen since the unfccc was signed. its yearly conferences are the stage of global negotiations. the kyoto protocol extended the unfccc and included legally binding commitments for most developed countries to limit their emissions. during the negotiations the g pushed for a mandate requiring developed countries to the lead in reducing their emissions since developed countries contributed most to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. per capita emissions were also still relatively low in developing countries and developing countries would need to emit more to meet their development needs. theopenhagen accord has been widely portrayed as disappointing because of its low goals and was rejected by poorer nations including the g. associated parties aimed to limit the global temperature rise to below c. the accord set the goal of sending billion per year to developing countries for mitigation and adaptation by and proposed the founding of the green climate fund. as of the fund has failed to reach its expected target and risks a shrinkage in its funding. in all un countries negotiated the paris agreement which aims to keep global warming well below. c and contains an aspirational goal of keeping warming under. c. the agreement replaced the kyoto protocol. unlike kyoto no binding emission targets were set in the paris agreement. instead a set of procedures was made binding. countries have to regularly set ever more ambitious goals and reevaluate these goals every five years. the paris agreement restated that developing countries must be financially supported. as of october states and the european union have signed the treaty and states and the eu have ratified or acceded to the agreement. the montreal protocol an international agreement to stop emitting ozone depleting gases may have been more effective at curbing greenhouse gas emissions than the kyoto protocol specifically designed to do so. the kigali amendment to the montreal protocol aims to reduce the emissions of hydrofluorocarbons a group of powerful greenhouse gases which served as a replacement for banned ozone depleting gases. this made the montreal protocol a stronger agreement against climate change. in the united kingdom parliament became the first national government to declare a climate emergency. other countries and jurisdictions followed suit. that same year the european parliament declared a climate and environmental emergency. the european commission presented its european green deal with the goal of making the eu carbon neutral by. major countries in asia have made similar pledges south korea and japan have committed to become carbon neutral by and china by. in the european commission released its fit for legislation package which contains guidelines for the car industry all new cars on the european market must be zero emission vehicles from. while india has strong incentives for renewables it also plans a significant expansion of coal in the country. as of based on information from national climate plans which represent of the parties to the paris agreement estimated total greenhouse gas emissions will be. lower compared to levels below the or reduction goals to limit global warming to. c or c respectively. there is a near complete scientific consensus that the climate is warming and that this is caused by human activities. agreement in recent literature reached over. older surveys found to of climate scientists agreeing on humanitys role in causing climate change based on the exact question and who responded. no scientific body of national or international standing disagrees with this view. consensus has further developed that some form of action should be taken to protect people against the impacts of climate change. national science academies have called on world leaders to cut global emissions. scientific discussion takes place in journal articles that are peer reviewed. scientists assess these every few years in the intergovernmental panel on climate change reports. the ipcc assessment report stated that it is unequivocal that climate change is caused by humans. climate change came to international public attention in the late s. due to confusing media coverage in the early s people often confounded climate change with other environmental issues like ozone depletion. in popular culture the first movie to reach a mass public on the topic was the day after tomorrow in followed a few years later by the al gore documentary an inconvenient truth. books stories and films about climate change fall under the genre of climate fiction. significant regional gender age and political differences exist in both public concern for and understanding of climate change. more highly educated people and in some countries women and younger people were more likely to see climate change as a serious threat. partisan gaps also exist in many countries and countries with high co emissions tend to be less concerned. views on causes of climate change vary widely between countries. concern has increased over time to the point where a majority of citizens in many countries now express a high level of worry about climate change or view it as a global emergency. higher levels of worry are associated with stronger public support for policies that address climate change. public debate about climate change has been strongly affected by climate change denial and misinformation which originated in the united states and has since spread to other countries particularly canada and australia. the actors behind climate change denial form a well funded and relatively coordinated coalition of fossil fuel companies industry groups conservative think tanks and contrarian scientists. like the tobacco industry before the main strategy of these groups has been to manufacture doubt about scientific data and results. many who deny dismiss or hold unwarranted doubt about the scientific consensus on anthropogenic climate change are labelled as climate change skeptics which several scientists have noted is a misnomer. there are different variants of climate denial some deny that warming takes place at all some acknowledge warming but attribute it to natural influences and some minimise the negative impacts of climate change. manufacturing uncertainty about the science later developed into a manufactured controversy creating the belief that there is significant uncertainty about climate change within the scientific community in order to delay policy changes. strategies to promote these ideas include criticism of scientific institutions and questioning the motives of individual scientists. an echo chamber of climate denying blogs and media has further fomented misunderstanding of climate change. climate protests have risen in popularity in the s. these protests demand that political leaders take action to prevent climate change. they can take the form of public demonstrations fossil fuel divestment lawsuits and other activities. prominent demonstrations include the school strike for climate. in this initiative young people across the globe have been protesting since by skipping school on fridays inspired by swedish teenager greta thunberg. mass civil disobedience actions by groups like extinction rebellion have protested by disrupting roads and public transport. litigation is increasingly used as a tool to strengthen climate action from public institutions and companies. activists also initiate lawsuits which target governments and demand that they take ambitious action or enforce existing laws on climate change. lawsuits against fossil fuel companies generally seek compensation for loss and damage. in the s joseph fourier proposed the greenhouse effect to explain why earths temperature was higher than the suns energy alone could explain. earths atmosphere is transparent to sunlight so sunlight reaches the surface where it is converted to heat. however the atmosphere is not transparent to heat radiating from the surface and captures some of that heat which warms the planet. in eunice newton foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air and the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide. she concluded that an atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature... starting in john tyndall established that nitrogen and oxygentogether totalling of dry airare transparent to radiated heat. however water vapour and some gases absorb radiated heat and re radiate that heat within the atmosphere. tyndall proposed that changes in the concentrations of these gases may have caused climatic changes in the past including ice ages. svante arrhenius noted that water vapour in air continuously varied but the co concentration in air was influenced by long term geological processes. at the end of an ice age warming from increased co levels would increase the amount of water vapour amplifying warming in a feedback loop. in he published the first climate model of its kind showing that halving of co levels could have produced the drop in temperature initiating the ice age. arrhenius calculated the temperature increase expected from doubling co to be around c. other scientists were initially sceptical and believed the greenhouse effect to be saturated so that adding more co would make no difference. they thought climate would be self regulating. from onwards guy stewart callendar published evidence that climate was warming and co levels rising but his calculations met the same objections. in the s gilbert plass created a detailed computer model that included different atmospheric layers and the infrared spectrum. this model predicted that increasing co levels would cause warming. around the same time hans suess found evidence that co levels had been rising and roger revelle showed that the oceans would not absorb the increase. the two scientists subsequently helped charles keeling to begin a record of continued increase which has been termed the keeling curve. scientists alerted the public and the dangers were highlighted at james hansensongressional testimony. the intergovernmental panel on climate change set up in to provide formal advice to the worlds governments spurred interdisciplinary research. ar working group ii reportjump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. a since the industrial revolution the global annual temperature has increased in total by a little more than degree celsius or about degrees fahrenheit. between the year that accurate recordkeeping beganand it rose on average by. degrees celsius every years. since however the rate of increase has more than doubled for the last years we ve seen the global annual temperature rise by. degrees celsius or. degrees fahrenheit per decade. the result a planet that has never been hotter. nine of the warmest years since have occurred since and the warmest years on record have all occurred since. climate change deniers have argued that there has been a pause or a slowdown in rising global temperatures but numerous studies including a paper published in the journal environmental research letters have disproved this claim. the impacts of global warming are already harming people around the world. now climate scientists have concluded that we must limit global warming to. degrees celsius by if we are to avoid a future in which everyday life around the world is marked by its worst most devastating effects the extreme droughts wildfires floods tropical storms and other disasters that we refer to collectively as climate change. these effects are felt by all people in one way or another but are experienced most acutely by the underprivileged the economically marginalized and people of color for whom climate change is often a key driver of poverty displacement hunger and social unrest. a global warming occurs when carbon dioxide and other air pollutants collect in the atmosphere and absorb sunlight and solar radiation that have bounced off the earth s surface. normally this radiation would escape into space but these pollutants which can last for years to centuries in the atmosphere trap the heat and cause the planet to get hotter. these heat trapping pollutantsspecifically carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide water vapor and synthetic fluorinated gasesare known as greenhouse gases and their impact is called the greenhouse effect. though natural cycles and fluctuations have caused the earth s climate to change several times over the last years our current era of global warming is directly attributable to human activityspecifically to our burning of fossil fuels such as coal oil gasoline and natural gas which results in the greenhouse effect. in the united states the largest source of greenhouse gases is transportation followed closely by electricity production and industrial activity. curbing dangerous climate change requires very deep cuts in emissions as well as the use of alternatives to fossil fuels worldwide. the good news is that countries around the globe have formally committedas part of the paris climate agreementto lower their emissions by setting new standards and crafting new policies to meet or even exceed those standards. the not so good news is that we re not working fast enough. to avoid the worst impacts of climate change scientists tell us that we need to reduce global carbon emissions by as much as percent by. for that to happen the global community must take immediate concrete steps to decarbonize electricity generation by equitably transitioning from fossil fuelbased production to renewable energy sources like wind and solar to electrify our cars and trucks and to maximize energy efficiency in our buildings appliances and industries. a scientists agree that the earth s rising temperatures are fueling longer and hotter heat waves more frequent droughts heavier rainfall and more powerful hurricanes. in for example scientists concluded that a lengthy drought in californiathe state s worst water shortage in yearshad been intensified by to percent by global warming. they also said the odds of similar droughts happening in the future had roughly doubled over the past century. and in the national academies of science engineering and medicine announced that we can now confidently attribute some extreme weather events like heat waves droughts and heavy precipitation directly to climate change. the earth s ocean temperatures are getting warmer toowhich means that tropical storms can pick up more energy. in other words global warming has the ability to turn a category storm into a more dangerous category storm. in fact scientists have found that the frequency of north atlantic hurricanes has increased since the early s as has the number of storms that reach categories and. the atlantic hurricane season included a record breaking tropical storms major hurricanes and hurricanes altogether. with increased intensity come increased damage and death. the united states saw an unprecedented weather and climate disasters that caused at least a billion dollars worth of damage in but was the costliest on record and among the deadliest as well taken together that years tropical storms caused nearly billion in damage and led to more than fatalities. the impacts of global warming are being felt everywhere. extreme heat waves have caused tens of thousands of deaths around the world in recent years. and in an alarming sign of events to come antarctica has lost nearly four trillion metric tons of ice since the s. the rate of loss could speed up if we keep burning fossil fuels at our current pace some experts say causing sea levels to rise several meters in the next to years and wreaking havoc on coastal communities worldwide. a each year scientists learn more about the consequences of global warming and each year we also gain new evidence of its devastating impact on people and the planet. as the heat waves droughts and floods associated with climate change become more frequent and more intense communities suffer and death tolls rise. if we re unable to reduce our emissions scientists believe that climate change could lead to the deaths of more than people around the globe every year and force million people into poverty by. global warming is already taking a toll on the united states. and if we aren t able to get a handle on our emissions here s just a smattering of what we can look forward to though everyone is affected by climate change not everyone is affected equally. indigenous people people of color and the economically marginalized are typically hit the hardest. inequities built into our housing health care and labor systems make these communities more vulnerable to the worst impacts of climate changeeven though these same communities have done the least to contribute to it. a in recent years china has taken the lead in global warming pollution producing about percent of all co emissions. the united states comes in second. despite making up just percent of the world s population our nation produces a sobering percent of all global co emissionsnearly as much as the european union and india combined. and america is still number one by far in cumulative emissions over the past years. as a top contributor to global warming the united states has an obligation to help propel the world to a cleaner safer and more equitable future. our responsibility matters to other countries and it should matter to us too. a we ve started. but in order to avoid the worsening effects of climate change we need to do a lot moretogether with other countriesto reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and transition to clean energy sources. under the administration of president donald trump the united states withdrew from the paris climate agreement rolled back or eliminated dozens of clean air protections and opened up federally managed lands including culturally sacred national monuments to fossil fuel development. although president biden has pledged to get the country back on track years of inaction during and before the trump administrationand our increased understanding of global warming s serious impactsmean we must accelerate our efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. despite the lack of cooperation from the trump administration local and state governments made great strides during this period through efforts like the american cities climate challenge and ongoing collaborations like the regional greenhouse gas initiative. meanwhile industry and business leaders have been working with the public sector creating and adopting new clean energy technologies and increasing energy efficiency in buildings appliances and industrial processes. today the american automotive industry is finding new ways to produce cars and trucks that are more fuel efficient and is committing itself to putting more and more zero emission electric vehicles on the road. developers cities and community advocates are coming together to make sure that new affordable housing is built with efficiency in mind reducing energy consumption and lowering electric and heating bills for residents. and renewable energy continues to surge as the costs associated with its production and distribution keep falling. in renewable energy sources such as wind and solar provided more electricity than coal for the very first time in u. s. history. president biden has made action on global warming a high priority. on his first day in office he recommitted the united states to the paris climate agreement sending the world community a strong signal that we were determined to join other nations in cutting our carbon pollution to support the shared goal of preventing the average global temperature from rising more than. degrees celsius above preindustrial levels. and significantly the president has assembled a climate team of experts and advocates who have been tasked with pursuing action both abroad and at home while furthering the cause of environmental justice and investing in nature based solutions. a no while we can t win the fight without large scale government action at the national level we also can t do it without the help of individuals who are willing to use their voices hold government and industry leaders to account and make changes in their daily habits. wondering how you can be a part of the fight against global warming reduce your own carbon footprint by taking a few easy steps make conserving energy a part of your daily routine and your decisions as a consumer. when you shop for new appliances like refrigerators washers and dryers look for products with the government s energy star label they meet a higher standard for energy efficiency than the minimum federal requirements. when you buy a car look for one with the highest gas mileage and lowest emissions. you can also reduce your emissions by taking public transportation or carpooling when possible. and while new federal and state standards are a step in the right direction much more needs to be done. voice your support of climate friendly and climate change preparedness policies and tell your representatives that equitably transitioning from dirty fossil fuels to clean power should be a top prioritybecause it s vital to building healthy more secure communities. you don t have to go it alone either. movements across the country are showing how climate action can build community be led by those on the front lines of its impacts and create a future that s equitable and just for all. demand climate actionlearn morethis story was originally published on march and has been updated with new information and links. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. it s urgent. it s ambitious. but most of all it s totally doable. the western city of ahmedabad is preparing residents to cope with the longer and more intense heat waves sweeping across south asiaand inspiring other indian cities and states to follow suit. by increasing the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere we re amplifying the planet s natural greenhouse effect and turning up the dial on global warming. the most widespread damaging storms on earth are getting worse and climate change is a big reason why. here s a look at what causes hurricanes and how to address the threat of a wetter windier world. the u. n. report warns that dire impacts from climate change will arrive sooner than many expected. here s why we need to follow the report s advice and why every ton of emissions reductions can make a difference. healing the planet starts at homein your garage in your kitchen and at your dining room table. short answer yes. even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet. what is your city doing about climate change ask your local leaders these five questions. how smog soot greenhouse gases and other top air pollutants are affecting the planetand your health. as temperatures and carbon levels rise even breathing has become a challenge. here s what you can do to help clear the air. nrdc senior attorney ben longstreth explains how plaintiffs for these cases get chosenand how you can help advance the cause in or out of the courtroom. gun control activists want to use financial levers to curtail firearm sales. can we do the same for carbon emissions when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosurestogether for the environment. human healthwe all drink water that comes from a source this may be a lake or local river. in countries that have poor screening and purification practices people often get water borne disease outbreaks such as cholera and tuberculosis. every year there are an estimated million cholera cases and deaths due to cholera. in developed countries even where there are better purification methods people still suffer from the health effects of water pollution. take toxins emitted by algae growth for instance this can cause stomach aches and rashes. excess nitrogen in drinking water also poses serious risks to infants. epa s nationallakes assessment found that almost per cent of the nation s lakes have high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus pollution. the report also showed that poor lake conditions related to nitrogen or phosphorus pollution doubled the likelihood of poor ecosystem health.. ecosystemsnutrient pollution from upstream often flow downhill and even travel miles into other larger water bodies. the effect is that it breeds algae growth and causes the growth of many more water organism. this algae attack affects fish and other aquatic animals by absorbing and reducing their oxygen supply. algae growth also clogs fish gills. naturally the order of ecosystems in that water are affected negatively as the destruction or introduction of any foreign organism alter the entire food chain in there.. death of animalsanimals including water animals die when water is poisoned for various reasons. other animals are stressed and their populations are endangered. in a classic case of marine pollution in recent time miles of a us coastline was affected by an oil spill. that water pollution caused a lot of damage and deaths of many animals. over animals were reported dead just months after the spill including many that are already on the endangered species list. immediate impact on the wildlife includes oil coated birds and sea turtles mammal ingestion of oil and dead or dying deep sea coral. animals are also affected by solid waste thrown into water bodies as they harm them in many ways.. economic costfrom the above it is evident that there is some real financial implications that will result from water pollution. it can cost a lot more to purify drinking water that takes its source from nutrient polluted water bodies. fishing stock is affected negatively when there is a depletion of oxygen. consumers are also wary of fish from these sources and tend to stay away from them costing fisheries to lose revenue. in places where there are water activities or sports lots of money is spent to clean up the water from algae blooms and the like. the u. s. tourism industry loses close to billion each year mostly from losses in fishing and recreational activities because of nutrient polluted water bodies. in mississippi alone tourism in the three counties that border the gulf coast accounts for about. billion in visitor expenditures percent of state travel and tourism tax revenues and direct jobs. imagine this picture unep reports that around the world onethis is the idea of not making too much wasteconsidering the threats facing ecosystems we can begin to appreciateas long as humans live there will be the needopen access is an initiative that aims to make scientific research freely available to all. to date our community has made over million downloads. it s based on principles of collaboration unobstructed discovery and most importantly scientific progression. as phd students we found it difficult to access the research we needed so we decided to create a new open access publisher that levels the playing field for scientists across the world. how by making research easy to access and puts the academic needs of the researchers before the business interests of publishers. we are a community of more than authors and editors from institutions spanning countries including nobel prize winners and some of the world s most cited researchers. publishing on intechopen allows authors to earn citations and find new collaborators meaning more people see your work not only from your own field of study but from other related fields too. brief introduction to this section that descibes open access especially from an intechopen perspectivewant to get in touch contact our london head office or media team hereour team is growing all the time so we re always on the lookout for smart people who want to help us reshape the world of scientific publishing. open access peer reviewed chapterby inyinbor adejumoke a. adebesin babatunde o. oluyori abimbola p. adelani akande tabitha a. dada adewumi o. and oreofe toyin a. submitted april reviewed october published march doi. intechopen. home books water challenges of an urbanizing worlddownloaded the stress on our water environment as a result of increased industrialization which aids urbanization is becoming very high thus reducing the availability of clean water. polluted water is of great concern to the aquatic organism plants humans and climate and indeed alters the ecosystem. the preservation of our water environment which is embedded in sustainable development must be well driven by all sectors. while effective wastewater treatment has the tendency of salvaging the water environment integration of environmental policies into the actor firms core objectives coupled with continuous periodical enlightenment on the present and future consequences of environmental water pollution will greatly assist in conserving the water environment. address all correspondence to inyinbor. adejumoke landmarkuniversity. edu. ngdoi. intechopen. water challenges of an urbanizing worldedited by matja glavanindustrialization in any society is a major initiator of development and urbanization. although the merits of industrialization are innumerable it has been identified as a major threat to the environment as it releases various toxic chemicals gases solid wastes as well as microbes of various kinds into our immediate environmentland air and water. of particular interest is water pollution which has become a global challenge developing nations being highly affected due to their drive for development. pollution of our water bodies poses a great threat to humans and the aquatic ecosystem while marked population increase catalyzes climatic changes. for instance various human activities as well as the release of greenhouse gases by industries greatly contributes to global warming planet temperature enhancement and lowering of atmospheric air quality. the drive for sustainable development must bring along water pollution prevention techniques. effective wastewater treatment before their eventual discharge is one way to driving water pollution prevention. some remediate climate change mitigation measures against water pollution can also be explored. this chapter is aimed at critically discussing water pollution effects viz a viz global challenges threat and climatic impacts while also focusing on various possible preventive measures. sustainable development in any society is an access to initiate a good standard of living for the populace. it aims at providing solutions to the economic environmental and societal challenges without posing a threat to human and environmental future development that is we must consider the future as we make present decisions. also these include social progress and equality environmental protection conservation of natural resources and stable economic growth. there are numerous instances where urbanization has destroyed the environment and threatened its survival chances. sustainable development put into consideration how we survive in the natural world protecting it from destruction and damages. one of the major challenges of urbanization is sustainability as most developed or developing society now revitalizes a lot of natural resources daily. most of these resources meet the needs of man but they are also limited. sustainable development tends to balance the competing needs of the society. in achieving this many science bodies and institutions have seen the requisite of sustainable development and have set goals and targets to meet it. this also has pushed such institutions to have a role in measuring and monitoring the impact of these goals on the society. however the contribution of scientist in sustainable development should not only focus on the environment. it should also take into consideration the health of the populace in ensuring that no area of life suffers. while sustainable development may mean different things to different people environmental sustainability is all encompassing. it is directly concerned with the future of humanity and it defines how we should protect and handle the sustainability of resources air quality water quality and ecosystems. it also helps to prevent the environment from impending damage from technological advancement. one way to achieving environmental sustainability is via effective wastewater treatment. various conventional wastewater treatment methods are available their characteristics vary from complexities of operations through sludge generations among other things to various inadequacies. their economic disadvantages are widely related to expensive equipment complexities of operations and skilful manpower requirement. many industries avoid the conventional wastewater treatment methods due to their economic disadvantages hence discharging untreated or fairly treated wastewater into the water bodies. a simple and cheap wastewater treatment method will therefore facilitate effective wastewater treatment and protect the water environment from pollution. water is an essential and general need of life with an undeniable effect directly or indirectly. all industrial environmental and metabolic processes are water dependent. in living organisms water plays a number of roles such as solvent temperature buffer metabolite living environment and lubricants. water however is said to be polluted when some of the water quality parameters have been hampered by unguided and irregularities from several anthropogenic activities thus rendering water unfit for intended use. water pollution may pose serious threat to the environment as well as lives. pollutant effects may vary depending on their types and source. for instance while heavy metals dyes and some other organic pollutants have been identified as carcinogens hormones pharmaceuticals and cosmetics and personal care product wastes are known as endocrine disruptive chemicals. these pollutants which enter into the water body through various channel but predominantly anthropogenic have become a great concern to environmentalists due to various hazard they pose on the environment. heavy metals top the list of inorganic pollutant with wide range of negative effects on aquatic organisms plants and human. heavy metals are released into the environment via different routes such as industries mining activities agricultural activities etc.. bioavailable metals present in the soil may be absorbed by plants resulting in serious plant metabolism dysfunctioning. high heavy metal ion concentrations are also known to damage the cell membrane affect enzyme involved in chlorophyll production thus reducing photosynthetic rate as well as affect plant reproduction via decrease in pollen and seed viability. humans and animals can be exposed to heavy metal toxicity through the food web direct consumption of water containing metal or via inhalation. heavy metals readily bioaccumulates in vegetables and enters into man and animal through food chain. effects of heavy metal toxicity on human ranges from mild eye nose and skin irritations through severe headache stomach ache diarrhea hematemesis vomiting dizziness to organ dysfunctioning such as cirrhosis necrosis low blood pressure hypertension and gastrointestinal distress. while some heavy metals also called essential elements are required in minute amount in the body for various biochemical processes others such as lead cadmium arsenic and mercury are of serious threat and considered foreign in the body. looking at specifics human ingestion of water polluted with arsenic can cause cancer of the lungs liver and bladder. kidney and lungs damage as well as bone fragility may result when cadmium containing water is ingested. exposure to lead can severely damage the brain and kidneys. in children lead exposure even at very low concentration may hamper learning cause memory loss affect attention and response functions and generally make children aggressive. in pregnant women high levels of exposure to lead may cause miscarriage whereas in men it can damage the organs responsible for sperm production. mercury is unique amidst other heavy metals it has the capacity to travel a wide range of distance thus have been classified as a global pollutants. the chemical form of mercury in the environment is also important in analyzing their toxicity. the organic form of mercury that is methyl mercury and dimethyl mercury is known to be more toxic than inorganic mercury. while inhaled mercury goes into the blood stream their elimination from the body is either through the urine or faeces. mercury has the ability to exist in the urine for about months hence their renal dysfunctioning characteristic. many physiological disorders may accompany crustaceans exposure to metals and instant metabolic activities alterations. exposure of crustaceans to heavy metals may also result in loss of appetite for food and subsequently body weight loss. continuous exposure may reduce reproduction in adults as well as hamper the growth larvae. organic pollutants are very wide in variety with a huge range of toxicity. among the list of organic pollutants that has been of great threat to aquatic organisms plants and humans are dyes plant and animal pharmaceuticals personal care products wastes as well as petroleum organic pollutants. a group of chemicals referred to as endocrine disruptive chemicals also belongs to the organic pollutants group which are classed as emerging contaminants. edcs are described as external agents that interfere with hormonal activities thus affecting the normal homeostatic reproduction development or behavior. dyes are water soluble giant chemical that is greatly used in many industries viz textile leather and tanning food paper etc. to impact color on products. aquatic organisms plants and humans are greatly affected by dyes presence in water. they impede sunlight penetration into water bodies and reduce dissolved oxygen thus leading to death of photosynthetic organism and other lives within the aquatic environment. humans may be exposed to dye toxicity via consumption of vegetables and fish which bioaccumulate dyes. the use of colored paper towels used in drying hands and in food preparation is another route of exposure to human. dyes are considered as carcinogenic and mutagenic thus their removal from wastewater before disposal is ultimately important. human and veterinary pharmaceuticals which are members of edcs are chemicals used as curative or preventive of various diseases. veterinary pharmaceutical may also serve the purpose of increasing efficiency of food production. pharmaceuticals are used widely and unavoidably thus they enter into the environment through one of these routes indiscriminate disposal of hospital and household waste landfill leaching drainage water and sewage. although pharmaceuticals have been found to exist in various environmental samples at the ng l to g l levels it is considered a great threat to both aquatic lives and humans. the presence of pharmaceuticals in water is known to pose both acute and chronic toxicity on aquatic organisms. edcs as their name implies causes abnormal endocrine activities and increase cancer risk in human. their effects on aquatic lives may range from endocrine system disruption through the reduction in eggs and sperm cells production to feminization of female aquatics. water is one important part of our day to day activities and their preservation can never be overemphasized. three quarter of the fluid in man is made of water and it forms the essential medium in which the biochemical reactions take place in human body. water moves blood from one place to the other in the body and helps in digestion electrically charged ions which generate nerve signals that make the human brain possible are also held and transported by water. water is a good solvent and it is usually referred to as universal solvent all the major components in cells that is protein deoxyribonucleic acid and polysaccharides are all soluble in water. pure water is tasteless odorless and transparent and thus provides a habitat for aquatic plants and organisms because sunlight can reach them within the water. though clean water is a vital commodity for the well being of human but unfortunately the availability of fresh water is unevenly distributed and greatly threatened where available due to problems associated with climate change inefficient water management and pollution. recent report says very high percentage of the world population still lacks water for human well being and ecosystem conservation. the world is faced with the dilemma of achieving balance between economic development and sustainable natural environment. effective wastewater treatment has been earlier identified a way of protecting the water environment with detailed discussion on effective cheap and accessible method of wastewater treatment. various other methods of water purification such as forward and or reverse osmosis precipitations coagulation filtrations modular anaerobic system microbial fuel cell and advanced oxidation process with their attendant challenges have been reported in literature. various environmental policies stipulating discharge protocols exists. these policies are however not effectively executed as the industries consider them as damaging to business. the ability of industries to run with the various environmental discharge policies will sustain our natural environment. policy integration that is factoring environmental issues of concern into the core of economic development is highly important to facilitate policy performance. the main actors in environmental issues that is the industries agro firms and populace show very little understanding of the impact of their activities on the present and future environment. while organized periodical training concerning environmental sustainability should form part of environmental policy objectives ensuring that these objectives are integrated into sectors plains and policies is important. drinking water supplied to our communities is usually sourced from rivers springs and underground sources. usually some form of treatment is carried out to ensure the water is fit for drinking although some sources are somewhat free from contaminating microorganism and can be clean for example deep well. in many developing countries one source of water can serve many uses such as drinking washing swimming bathing etc. in the same vein sewage can be channeled into water bodies. sewage can be defined as used water draining out of homes and industries that contain a wide range of debris chemicals and microorganisms. such water is regarded as potential health hazard to consumers or the users of other sort. a major kind of hazard is the presence of pathogenic organisms in such water. this is why water is usually treated in three phases. the first is to separate large matter in the water source and the second stage focuses on removing more toxic substances and other matter. the tertiary phase involves total purification of water commonly by chemical disinfection. more recently membrane bioreactors are being used and have been found to be very efficient in removing contaminants. these are combinations of communities and high efficiency membranes that are much more effective at removing contaminants. the role of microbes is obvious in the second stage where microorganisms actively carry out biodegradation of organic matter in the aqueous portion produced after the first stage. biodegradation of materials such as paper and petroleum are by bacteria algae and protozoa. when water is exposed to air soil as well as effluents it gains saprobic microorganisms it can also pick up pathogens such as cryptosporidium campylobacter salmonella shigella etc. to monitor water for each of these pathogens may not be possible but detection of fecal contamination is an easier way of spotting contamination. in such case when the fecal contamination is high pathogens are believed to be present and the water is unsafe for drinking. hence indicator organisms are used as tools to detect fecal contamination of water. they usually inhabit the intestine of mammals and birds and can be easily identified using common laboratory procedures. to achieve water protection it will be almost impossible to search for the pathogens themselves. hence certain organisms with specified criteria are used as indicators of the presence of enteric pathogens in a water sample. an indicator bacterium should be applicable for analysis of all types of water it should be found anytime enteric pathogens are present and it should thrive in the wastewater longer than the toughest enteric pathogen. in addition such organism should not reproduce in the contaminated water because this will give exaggerated values and it should not be harmful to human begins. other criteria are that the level of contamination should be directly proportional to the level of fecal contamination assay procedure for the indicator organism should be highly specific and the test procedure should be easily performed. the following are commonly used as indicators of fecal contamination in water total coliforms escherichia coli fecal coliforms fecal streptococci enterococci coliphage and clostridium perfringens. coliforms are members of the family enterobacteriaceae. they are facultative anaerobic gram negative nonsporing rod shaped bacteria that ferment lactose with gas formation within hours at. microbial contamination of water can be detected by checking for certain organisms including heterotrophic bacteria coliforms and escherichia coliin such samples. the work by kora et al. showed that heterotrophic bacteria were in abundance in the lake water sampled. they also reported that contamination by e. coliand coliforms were beyond the allowable limit indiscriminate disposal of sewage into water as well as release of human excreta was implicated in the high level of indicator organisms. control of pathogens in water is important to prevent waterborne diseases this can be effectively done using multiple barrier approach. microbial treatment methods goes further than traditional municipal wastewater treatment because it takes into consideration the removal of nutrients and easily degradable organic compounds as well as the possible presence of toxic compounds and variations in ph of the wastewater. a more advanced design is required in the bioreactor to be used. some parameters to be considered in designing a treatment system are biomass yield nutrient addition the supply of oxygen or other electron donor ph control as well as kinetics that is biological reaction rates. it is important to note at high concentration many compounds of interest are toxic to bacteria being used for treatment. also some dissolved organic and inorganic compounds may constitute inhibitors to biodegradation by the organism. biological treatment processes may not consist of the followinglagoon treatment activated sludge as well as fixed film bioreactors. the lagoon treatment is long detention time basins but unlike activated sludge processes they do not use solid recycle. such treatment scheme may be in three categories anaerobic lagoon treatment which makes use of highly loaded lakes creating anaerobic conditions. it has been used successfully for the pretreatment of meat and poultry processing wastewater reducing the biochemical oxygen demand considerably. in the case of facultative ponds there is an aerobic surface and an anaerobic bottom. the top aerobic layer facilitates treatment of dissolved organic compounds as well as odourous compounds. this has found application in pulp and paper industries. with regards to aerated lagoons oxygen is provided by mechanical means or diffused aeration and the solids are continuously mixed and in suspension. biological oxygen demand removal may range up to. another biological treatment process of interest is the activated sludge. it is made up of an aeration basin where aeration equipment provides both oxygen and adequate mixing of wastewater to maintain a uniformly mixed liquor suspended solids. the aeration basin is followed by a liquidsolid separation usually in a clarifier by gravity and finally the settled biomass is returned again to the activated sludge basin. examples of aeration basin configurations are plug flow systems single completely mixed basins and basins in series. the solid retention time is important in this treatment process. the solid retention time is the average time biomass is maintained in a biological treatment process reaction. generally srt control is temperature dependent and for a warmer climate srt should be between and days. the clarifier is very important in the performance of activated sludge processes. it ensures that efficient clarification and thickening of mixed liquor occurs. when the readily degradable soluble biochemical oxygen demand is high in wastewaters growth of filamentous bacteria is encouraged leading to poor sludge settlement. the use of powdered activated carbon has been discovered to enhance the efficiency of activated sludge processes. the pac functions by adsorbing inhibitory chemicals or adsorbing chemicals that buffer variable loads. the application between and mg liter of wastewater has been proven to remove organic inhibitors of the process as well as improve nitrification since it absorbs organic compounds that can prevent this process in autotrophic bacteria. apart from the aforementioned anaerobic bioreactors are also beneficial for the industrial wastewater treatment. this is because it is cost effective and can be used for industrial wastewater with high strength. the processes in the anaerobic bioreactor lead to the production of mainly methane as well as other gases. however there is a need to strike a balance between fermentation bacterial activity and methanogenic bacteria activity as the latter is slow growing. advantages of anaerobic treatment include low sludge formation production of useful product low nutrient requirement and more importantly less energy requirements since aeration is not necessary. in addition to the energy production advantages of anaerobic wastewater treatment high organic matter removal efficiency low excess sludge production and stable operation are characteristics of this wastewater treatment technique. a most recent advancement in the biological treatment of wastewater is the use of membranes in bioreactors. in such cases the membrane can serve three major purposes. firstly membranes can be used as a surface for the attachment for growth of organisms and to permit oxygen to permeate into the biofilm. an example of this is the hollow fiber gas permeable membranes in wastewater treatment. such membrane is produced from microporous hydrophobic polypropylene and allows almost oxygen transfer while ensuring high biomass density within the space. the second way membranes can be used as selective barriers. such membranes permit organic compounds in wastewater to permeate but do not transport ions into the bioreactor. thus it allows for the selection of biodegradable organic compounds. an example of a material used for such membrane is silicone rubber. finally membranes can be for biomass separation. this third category requires that the membrane be used instead of a clarifier after activated sludge treatment. when such membranes are used the effluent produced is of high quality and less sludge. in addition automated processing can be easily employed. the disadvantage however is the financial enormity of the investment for initial start up as well as maintenance. since coliform bacteria are often detected in drinking water and often the source of contamination is not known it is important to put in place control measures. the water distribution systems must be considered because water quality deterioration may occur. this can be as a result of reduced maintenance of the distribution system or from insufficient treatment and may lead to undue microbial growth which the consumer may not notice. water distribution systems should be periodically flushed to remove sediments deposits as well as the growth of microorganisms within the pipe. for areas where the flow rate is low and possibly of the water becoming stale is high a secondary disinfection using monochloramine and proper maintenance should be carried out in such as to prevent nitrification. another point is to avoid a break in the distribution system especially during construction repairs or installations and cross connections. the officers should also ensure that the level of treatment a water sample is given is in conformity with the quality of the source of water. also the sampling for laboratory analysis must also be taken into consideration and monitored thoroughly when aseptic techniques are compromised detection of coliforms may occur. even though reports of water diseases have been low and less serious in most developed countries it is still a major concern in some underdeveloped countries especially war ravaged countries. it is however important to operate a multibarrier approach which will ensure protection of the water source and also certify adequate treatment and distribution of water. it is however important that every occurrence of coliforms in drinking water be properly investigated so that if the contamination is as a result of operational deficiency this can be addressed and future occurrence is prevented thus safe guarding the health of the public. several modern methods of water purification have been well embraced in our society today. however some rural dwellers who may not be able to afford these modern treatment methods still have water pollution as a major challenge. furthermore the disinfection by products which remain after treatment is another reason why herbal attempts in water treatment should be encouraged. it is important to note that not many researchers apply their antimicrobial extract or fractions directly in water treatment. many groups stop at establishing the antimicrobial potential of their study plant whereas others go further to apply the extracts in water treatment. for instance a reported work used alcoholic aqueous and fresh juice extracts of ocimum sanctum and azadirachta indica and applied them in vitro against salmonella which was chosen as an indicator organism. the alcoholic extract gave the best result for well water whereas the aqueous extract was best for lake water. similarly inspired by the fact that tulsi neem and amla are used to treat microbial infection without any side effect another researcher compared the effectiveness of these three herbs in water purification using percentage of e. coliremoval to measure the effectiveness of each herb. a notable observation is the fact that a mixture of concentration of each herb is not as efficient as the synergistic combination of the three. an indirect application of herbs in water purification is their use in the synthesis of nanoparticles which are afterwards applied to remove contaminants from water. these extracts influence the surface properties of the nanoparticles thus dictating their unique properties owing to the obvious advantages of natural disinfection there is a need for more research into natural products for water purification. this will in no small way help rural dwellers to cheaply assess cheap clean water and so live a healthier lifestyle. all organisms including man need water for their survival. water resource managers had strongly depended on wastewater treatment in ensuring that the quality of water is sustained preserved and maintained for optimal use. by an estimated around billion people out of a total population of around billion will be living in areas of water stress. one of the major environmental issues affecting humanity is the increasing worldwide contamination of freshwater systems as a consequence of industrial and chemical compound materials being emptied into their pathways runways majorly in form of micro pollutants. according to schwarzenbach et al. most of these pollutants are present at low concentrations many of them however can raise significant toxicological concerns more importantly when such compounds are present as constituents of composite blends. numerous micro pollutants had been identified in literatures which are not vulnerable to current treatment and are subsequently transported to the aquatic environment. some of these include steroid hormones pesticides industrial chemicals pharmaceuticals and many other emerging materials. this consequently endangers both the aquatic and human life. it is therefore not surprising that freshwater pollution is a strong public menace which requires global concern. the next quotation properly situates the environmental risk humans are exposed to it is in the interest of all the world that climatic changes are understood and that the risks of irreversible damage to natural systems and the threats to the very survival of man be evaluated and allayed with the greatest urgency the above quotation were the statements of the president of the republic of the maldives his excellency maumoon abdul gayoom during the united nations general assembly held in in the united states of america as adapted from the. the meeting was centered on issues of environment and development. due to climate change effect both the thermal and hydrological phases of rivers are expected to vary. owning to these it is necessary to briefly discuss what climate change is as climate change has the potential of imposing additional pressures in some regions of the world. in other to get a good grasp of what climate change is it may be better to first define climate. climate is usually narrowly defined as the average weather or broadly as the statistical description in terms of the average and variability of relevant parameters or quantities of interest over a period of time ranging from days to millions of years. most often the parameters often used are temperature precipitation wind etc. climate can therefore be generally described as a state including statistical description of the climate system. climate change on the other hand often referred to as global warming is the rise in the average temperature on the earth s surface. it is well believed that the climate change event is as a consequence of human use of fossil fuels which consequently releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the air. these gases trap heat within the earth s atmosphere and can have a variety of effects ranging from rising sea levels to severe weather events. green et al. had submitted that global climate change can include natural and anthropogenic influences on terrestrial climate and the hydrologic cycle. most notable international scientific community had actualized the reality of climate change. some of these include the national aeronautics and space administration the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and the environmental protection agency of the united states to mention a few. these agencies further reiterated that climate change is a menace created from human activity to affect human. figure adapted from world health organization geneva report revealed that all the major activities of global climatic changes eventually bore its consequence on human in general and on human health in particular. inter relationship between various kinds of environmental change. adapted from who geneva report. however pressures and anxiety on the earth s climatic system are having impacts on the surface of the earth. apart from the rising surface temperatures the activities of increasing and frequent flooding and droughts and the changes in our natural water ecosystem are other areas of great concern in the continuous existence of man on earth. according to who geneva report climatic situation and activities affect human well being both directly and indirectly. the direct influence is through the physical effects of climatic extremes whereas the indirect means include the influence on the intensities or level of pollution in the air on the marine and freshwater systems that provide food and water as well as the pathogens that cause infectious diseases. for the purpose of this section we concentrate on the climatic activities with respect to water pollution. this will lead us to the next sub section. observational records and climate projections provide abundant evidence that freshwater resources are vulnerable and have the potential to be strongly impacted by climate change with wide ranging consequences for human societies and ecosystems excerpt from the executive summary of the technical paper of the ipcc edited by bates et al. human activity affects weather climate and the environment. while some of human activities are harmless others damage the environment. while the environment can absorb some abuse without long term effects much harmful human activity exceeds the environment s capacity to recover. water pollution is one of the inevitable human induced climate change issues that called for urgent remedial measures. water pollution will in no small measure affect or alter the basic water quality parameters comprising the micro pollutants physiochemical and biological parameters. probable and incessant changes in both rainfall and air temperature has the capacity to affect river flow thereby inducing chemical reaction kinetics as well as drop in the freshwater ecological quality. associated with such process are dilution of contaminants and water sediment loads which when ran into lakes will alter its natural features and affect its inhabitants. this form of water pollution or through man made toxic chemical or and by products addition may therefore generate some toxic and greenhouse gases which may subsequently contribute to global warming activities or more severe environmental threats. the greenhouse gases are the gaseous constituents of the atmosphere which can absorb and emit radiation at certain wavelengths within the spectrum of thermal infrared radiation emitted by the earth s surface the atmosphere itself and the clouds. the primary greenhouse gases in the earth s atmosphere include carbon dioxide nitrous oxide water vapor methane and ozone. the other ones identified from the kyoto protocol include hydrofluorocarbons perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride. some of these environmental threats include earth s temperature enhancement lowering of atmospheric air quality and killing of aquatic animals. consequently given the legacy of historic greenhouse gas emissions and the prospect of inevitable climate change one can not but commit significant financial and technical resources to remediating the effect through rigorous research efforts and sensitization activities more importantly to water pollution and water related issues. thus water resources managers are continuously and increasingly looking for information on the possible changes in hydrological regimes which may arise in the next few decades for likeable adaptation measure plan. an interesting challenge is that while incessant water pollution may bring about a change in climatic conditions through greenhouse effect and activities the climate too will in turn take its toll effect on the water system and environment. this is because the higher temperature generated from the greenhouse effect will eventually turn some part of the snowfall into rainfall causing an earlier snowmelt season. these effects will consequently alter the timing and volume of spring flood appreciably. the rise in sea level during this time will then cause saline water intrusion into groundwater aquifers close to the coast thereby reducing the available groundwater resources. this process will in no small measure affect humans as almost about of the world population depends on groundwater for their various activities. mitchelle et al. using physically hydrological and water temperature modeling framework had reported an increase in the seasonality of river discharge for about of the global land coverage for the projected and modeled data for years when compared with the years spanning. they also projected a rise in temperaturerevealing a projected global change into the future. other effects of climate change on the hydrological cycle include increasing atmospheric water vapor content changes in soil moisture and runoff and changing precipitation patterns. furthermore higher temperatures of freshwater and changes in extremes including floods and droughts can also intensify many forms of water pollution. the authors also showed that water fluctuation in quantity and quality has the potential of affecting food stability and availabilityleading to a reduction in food security to vulnerable poor farmers. almost of the entire population of the earth do not have adequate access to safe water while about suffer the effects of deplorable sanitary situations. schwarzenbach et al. had submitted that the increase in surface groundwater pollution will go a long way in affecting both the human and aquatic life systems. according to schwarzenbach et al. about of the earth s available and renewable freshwater are used for industrial domestic and agricultural purposes. however if this activities are not well managed water pollution may be inevitable with different kinds of pollutants. some of the water pollutants according to the authors include industrial chemicals biocides natural chemicals industrial products as well as consumer products. industrial manufactured nanomaterials had also been found to be a major water pollutant whose effects is on the increase in affecting aquatic ecosystem. according to lapworth et al. groundwater pollution mainly results from landfill leachate infiltration of contaminated water from agricultural land groundwater surface water reaction as well as seepage of sewer systems. while some of these pollutants like heavy metals are not degraded at all some others disintegrated very slowly and can be transported to hundreds of kilometers away from the source. the effects of their waterborne pollution however ranges from contamination of drinking water causing drinking water quality problems to emission of greenhouse gases resulting in climatic change challenges. some remediate climate change mitigation measures against water pollution can however be taken. some of these include carbon dioxide capture and storage planting of bio energy crops proper solid waste disposition afforestation or reforestation cropland managementboth for water and reduced tillage among other measures. scientific researches involving water pollution should be geared more toward ascertaining the physical underlying molecular mechanisms and factors rather than just the usual empirical comparison approach that is commonly used. the mechanisms involved if well understood will go a long way in properly situating ways of combating the water pollution challenges. this according to metz and ingold may be achieved by developing a structure that addresses both the problem dimension and sustainability dimension of assessing best instruments that regulate water pollution. a sustainable working policy on water pollution should not only be designed and enacted but also rigorously followed more importantly in the developing and underdeveloped countries where the menace of water pollution has not been effectively managed. bemelmans videc had presented a classification for effectively managing water pollution. these are regulation economic instruments and information. these bemelmans videc classifications according to metz would help in differentiating source directed measures from end of pipe measures in water quality regulation. while the source directed measures help in avoiding pollution before toxic and injurious chemical materials enter into waters the end of pipe measures concentrate on filtering pollution after its input into wastewater. furthermore usage and disposal approaches should be in place with the aim of minimizing the addition of critical pollutants into aquatic environment. in addition such system specific properties and reactivities should be well understood and quantified. this kind of processes will yield a significant framework for reliable coverage and evaluation of chemical compounds in complex macroscopic ecosystems. other alternative methods for removing pollutants from waters include ozonation and advanced oxidation process coagulation flocculation membrane bioreactor pac and attached growth treatment processes. refer to the work of for comprehensive reading on the methodology and activity of each process. it can therefore be concluded that whatever form of measure taken in inhibiting both surface and groundwater will not only advance our aquatic ecosystem but will also help man from further endangering his environment from the menace of climate change. since water forms a core of the existence of human and other living things its preservation and sustainable availability can not be overemphasized. the availability of clean water is greatly threatened by various human activities and of interest is pollution which in turn affects the ecosystem and causes various climatic changes. while various wastewater treatment methods are being explored by industries and various treatment plants untreated wastewater is still being discharged into the water bodies by some industries. thus effective environmental protection policies compliance drive will be of immense benefit to the environment and by extension to human. factoring these environmental protection policies into the goals and objectives of various actors involved in environmental deterioration will help policies performance. this will serve as a step forward in the direction of ameliorating water pollution. the author. licensee intechopen. this chapter is distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution. license which permits unrestricted use distribution and reproduction in any medium provided the original work is properly cited. help us write another book on this subject and reach those readerstotal chapter downloadscrossref citationslogin to your personal dashboard for more detailed statistics on your publications. edited by matja glavanby amy y. olsen angela smith and shawn larsonedited by ismail m. m. rahmanby seyed y. s. lisar rouhollah motafakkerazad mosharraf m. hossain and ismail m. m. rahmanwe are intechopen the worlds leading publisher of open access books. built by scientists for scientists. our readership spans scientists professors researchers librarians and students as well as business professionals. we share our knowledge and peer reveiwed research papers with libraries scientific and engineering societies and also work with corporate r d departments and government entities. headquartersintechopen limited princes gate court london sw qj united kingdomphone intechopen. all rights reserved. empty searchwater is a basic resource that guarantees the life of all living beings on the planet. however its scarcity and pollution cause millions of people to have poor access to this much needed asset. although there are water treatment processes such as drinking water treatment or desalination that facilitate its treatment use and consumption in areas with quality or supply problems it is first necessary to avoid its contamination. in this video we show you what are the main causes and effects of water pollution. humans are the main cause of water pollution which is triggered in many ways by the dumping of industrial waste due to temperature rise that cause the alteration of water by reducing the oxygen in its composition or due to deforestation which causes sediments and bacteria to appear under the soil and therefore contaminate groundwater. in the same way the pesticides used in agricultural fields filter through underground channels and reach the consumption networks and also as a result of accidental spillage of oil. what are the main consequences of water pollution firstly the disappearance of biodiversity and aquatic ecosystems. also humans are harmed by the alteration in the food chain and by contracting illnesses when drinking or using contaminated water. as you can see water pollution has a great impact in the environment. for all this we must ensure water availability its sustainable management and sanitation for all as reflected in the sixth of the sustainable development goals adopted by the united nations in the agenda. after reading this article lets see if you really understood what causes pollution in rivers and seas. what pollutes water and what doesn t discard the wrong options related posts... and stay informed with the latest news on innovation. en cumplimiento del reglamento ue de proteccin de datos y dems normativa vigente en materia de proteccin de datos se le informa de que sus datos de carcter personal sern tratados por acciona s. a. con los siguientes datos identificativos nif a direccin avenida de europa parque empresarial de la moraleja de alcobendas tel email protecciondedatos acciona. com con la finalidad de atender sus comentarios y gestionar sus consultas solicitudes reclamaciones o sugerencias as como el envo por medios electrnicos de informacin sobre nuestros servicios y productos a travs del correo electrnico de contacto. la base jurdica para el tratamiento de los datos es el consentimiento del usuario al comunicarse con nosotros. los datos se conservarn mientras se mantenga la relacin y no se solicite su supresin y en cualquier caso nunca durante un plazo superior a doce meses. en caso de que su peticin no sea dirigida a acciona sino a una entidad que forma parte del grupo acciona sta comunicar los datos a la sociedad del grupo que pueda atender su solicitud de servicio o informacin de forma ms eficiente. en este sentido la comunicacin de estos datos puede constituir una transferencia internacional por estar estas empresas ubicadas en pases fuera del territorio de la unin europea para poder atender las necesidades de comunicacin entre las personas que forman parte del grupo a nivel mundial.. la aceptacin de los trminos de la privacidad supone el consentimiento para la transferencia internacional de sus datos necesaria para la correcta tramitacin de su peticin. no estn previstas otras cesiones de datos salvo obligacin legal. el interesado puede ejercitar sus derechos de acceso rectificacin supresin portabilidad y la limitacin u oposicin ante acciona s. a. dirigindose por escrito al departamento de proteccin de datos sita en avenida de europa de alcobendas o mediante el envo de un correo electrnico en la siguiente direccin protecciondedatos acciona. com adjuntando en ambos casos copia del dni u otro documento identificativo. asimismo podr en cualquier momento retirar el consentimiento prestado dirigindose a la direccin arriba indicada as como reclamar ante la autoridad de control. para ms informacin ponemos a su disposicin la poltica de privacidad de la pgina. sustainability is understood as the development that meets the present needs without compromising the capacities of future generations ensuring the balance between economic growth environmental care and social welfare. in sustainability for all we promote the awareness and difussion of good practices that allow to combine economic and social development with the preservation of natural resources. about us you currently have javascript disabled in your web browser please enable javascript to view our website as intended. here are the instructions of how to enable javascript in your browser. figure b. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including water vapour carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide absorb heat energy and emit it in all directions keeping earth s surface and lower atmosphere warm. adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere enhances the effect making earth s surface and lower atmosphere even warmer. image based on a figure from us epa. the sun serves as the primary energy source for earth s climate. some of the incoming sunlight is reflected directly back into space especially by bright surfaces such as ice and clouds and the rest is absorbed by the surface and the atmosphere. much of this absorbed solar energy is re emitted as heat. the atmosphere in turn absorbs and re radiates heat some of which escapes to space. any disturbance to this balance of incoming and outgoing energy will affect the climate. for example small changes in the output of energy from the sun will affect this balance directly. if all heat energy emitted from the surface passed through the atmosphere directly into space earth s average surface temperature would be tens of degrees colder than today. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including water vapour carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide act to make the surface much warmer than this because they absorb and emit heat energy in all directions keeping earth s surface and lower atmosphere warm. without this greenhouse effect life as we know it could not have evolved on our planet. adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere makes it even more effective at preventing heat from escaping into space. when the energy leaving is less than the energy entering earth warms until a new balance is established. greenhouse gases emitted by human activities alter earth s energy balance and thus its climate. humans also affect climate by changing the nature of the land surfaces and through the emission of pollutants that affect the amount and type of particles in the atmosphere. scientists have determined that when all human and natural factors are considered earth s climate balance has been altered towards warming with the biggest contributor being increases in co. figure b. measurements of atmospheric co since from the mauna loa observatory in hawaii and from the south pole show a steady annual increase in atmospheric co concentration. the measurements are made at remote places like these because they are not greatly influenced by local processes so therefore they are representative of the background atmosphere. the small up and down saw tooth pattern reflects seasonal changes in the release and uptake of co by plants. source scripps co program the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide have increased significantly since the industrial revolution began. in the case of carbon dioxide the average concentration measured at the mauna loa observatory in hawaii has risen from parts per million in to more than ppm in. the same rates of increase have since been recorded at numerous other stations worldwide. since preindustrial times the atmospheric concentration of co has increased by over methane has increased by more than and nitrous oxide has increased by roughly. more than half of the increase in co has occurred since. increases in all three gases contribute to warming of earth with the increase in co playing the largest role. see page b to learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. figure b. co variations during the past years obtained from analysis of air trapped in an ice core extracted from antarctica show a sharp rise in atmospheric co starting in the late century. modern atmospheric measurements from mauna loa are superimposed in gray. source figure by eric wolff data from etheridge et al. macfarling meure et al. scripps co program. scientists have examined greenhouse gases in the context of the past. analysis of air trapped inside ice that has been accumulating over time in antarctica shows that the co concentration began to increase significantly in the century after staying in the range of to ppm for the previous years. ice core records extending back years show that during that time co concentrations remained within the range of to ppm throughout many ice age cycles learn about the ice ages and no concentration above ppm is seen in ice core records until the past years. measurements of the forms of carbon in the modern atmosphere show a clear fingerprint of the addition of old carbon coming from the combustion of fossil fuels. in addition it is known that human activities currently emit an estimated billion tonnes of carbon each year mostly by burning fossil fuels which is more than enough to explain the observed increase in concentration. these and other lines of evidence point conclusively to the fact that the elevated co concentration in our atmosphere is the result of human activities. figure b. earth s global average surface temperature has risen as shown in this plot of combined land and ocean measurements from to derived from three independent analyses of the available data sets. the top panel shows annual average values from the three analyses and the bottom panel shows decadal average values including the uncertainty range for the maroon dataset. the temperature changes are relative to the global average surface temperature averaged from. source based on ipcc ar data from the hadcrut dataset noaa climate. gov data from uk met office hadley centre us national aeronautics and space administration goddard institute for space studies and us national oceanic and atmospheric administration national centers for environmental information. estimating global average surface air temperature increase requires careful analysis of millions of measurements from around the world including from land stations ships and satellites. despite the many complications of synthesising such data multiple independent teams have concluded separately and unanimously that global average surface air temperature has risen by about c since. although the record shows several pauses and accelerations in the increasing trend each of the last four decades has been warmer than any other decade in the instrumental record since. going further back in time before accurate thermometers were widely available temperatures can be reconstructed using climate sensitive indicators proxies in materials such as tree rings ice cores and marine sediments. comparisons of the thermometer record with these proxy measurements suggest that the time since the early s has been the warmest year period in at least eight centuries and that global temperature is rising towards peak temperatures last seen to years ago in the warmest part of our current interglacial period. many other impacts associated with the warming trend have become evident in recent years. arctic summer sea ice cover has shrunk dramatically. the heat content of the ocean has increased. global average sea level has risen by approximately cm since due both to the expansion of warmer ocean water and to the addition of melt waters from glaciers and ice sheets on land. warming and precipitation changes are altering the geographical ranges of many plant and animal species and the timing of their life cycles. in addition to the effects on climate some of the excess co in the atmosphere is being taken up by the ocean changing its chemical composition. based just on the physics of the amount of energy that co absorbs and emits a doubling of atmospheric co concentration from pre industrial levels would by itself cause a global average temperature increase of about c. in the overall climate system however things are more complex warming leads to further effects that either amplify or diminish the initial warming. the most important feedbacks involve various forms of water. a warmer atmosphere generally contains more water vapour. water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas thus causing more warming its short lifetime in the atmosphere keeps its increase largely in step with warming. thus water vapour is treated as an amplifier and not a driver of climate change. higher temperatures in the polar regions melt sea ice and reduce seasonal snow cover exposing a darker ocean and land surface that can absorb more heat causing further warming. another important but uncertain feedback concerns changes in clouds. warming and increases in water vapour together may cause cloud cover to increase or decrease which can either amplify or dampen temperature change depending on the changes in the horizontal extent altitude and properties of clouds. the latest assessment of the science indicates that the overall net global effect of cloud changes is likely to be to amplify warming. the ocean moderates climate change. the ocean is a huge heat reservoir but it is difficult to heat its full depth because warm water tends to stay near the surface. the rate at which heat is transferred to the deep ocean is therefore slow it varies from year to year and from decade to decade and it helps to determine the pace of warming at the surface. observations of the sub surface ocean are limited prior to about but since then warming of the upper m is readily apparent and deeper warming is also clearly observed since about. surface temperatures and rainfall in most regions vary greatly from the global average because of geographical location in particular latitude and continental position. both the average values of temperature rainfall and their extremes are also strongly affected by local patterns of winds. estimating the effects of feedback processes the pace of the warming and regional climate change requires the use of mathematical models of the atmosphere ocean land and ice built upon established laws of physics and the latest understanding of the physical chemical and biological processes affecting climate and run on powerful computers. models vary in their projections of how much additional warming to expect but all such models agree that the overall net effect of feedbacks is to amplify warming. rigorous analysis of all data and lines of evidence shows that most of the observed global warming over the past years or so can not be explained by natural causes and instead requires a significant role for the influence of human activities. in order to discern the human influence on climate scientists must consider many natural variations that affect temperature precipitation and other aspects of climate from local to global scale on timescales from days to decades and longer. one natural variation is the el nio southern oscillation an irregular alternation between warming and cooling in the equatorial pacific ocean that causes significant year to year regional and global shifts in temperature and rainfall patterns. volcanic eruptions also alter climate in part increasing the amount of small particles in the stratosphere that reflect or absorb sunlight leading to a short term surface cooling lasting typically about two to three years. over hundreds of thousands of years slow recurring variations in earth s orbit around the sun which alter the distribution of solar energy received by earth have been enough to trigger the ice age cycles of the past years. fingerprinting is a powerful way of studying the causes of climate change. different influences on climate lead to different patterns seen in climate records. this becomes obvious when scientists probe beyond changes in the average temperature of the planet and look more closely at geographical and temporal patterns of climate change. for example an increase in the sun s energy output will lead to a very different pattern of temperature change compared to that induced by an increase in co concentration. observed atmospheric temperature changes show a fingerprint much closer to that of a long term co increase than to that of a fluctuating sun alone. scientists routinely test whether purely natural changes in the sun volcanic activity or internal climate variability could plausibly explain the patterns of change they have observed in many different aspects of the climate system. these analyses have shown that the observed climate changes of the past several decades can not be explained just by natural factors. figure b. the amount and rate of warming expected for the century depends on the total amount of greenhouse gases that humankind emits. models project the temperature increase for a business as usual emissions scenario and aggressive emission reductions falling close to zero years from now. black is the modelled estimate of past warming. each solid line represents the average of different model runs using the same emissions scenario and the shaded areas provide a measure of the spread between the temperature changes projected by the different models. all data are relative to a reference period of. source based on ipcc ar scientists have made major advances in the observations theory and modelling of earth s climate system and these advances have enabled them to project future climate change with increasing confidence. nevertheless several major issues make it impossible to give precise estimates of how global or regional temperature trends will evolve decade by decade into the future. firstly we can not predict how much co human activities will emit as this depends on factors such as how the global economy develops and how society s production and consumption of energy changes in the coming decades. secondly with current understanding of the complexities of how climate feedbacks operate there is a range of possible outcomes even for a particular scenario of co emissions. finally over timescales of a decade or so natural variability can modulate the effects of an underlying trend in temperature. taken together all model projections indicate that earth will continue to warm considerably more over the next few decades to centuries. if there were no technological or policy changes to reduce emission trends from their current trajectory then further globally averaged warming of. to. c in addition to that which has already occurred would be expected during the century. projecting what those ranges will mean for the climate experienced at any particular location is a challenging scientific problem but estimates are continuing to improve as regional and local scale models advance. share national geographic headquarters street nw washington dc careers newsroom privacy notice sustainability policy terms of service code of ethics contact usnational geographic society is a organization. national geographic society. all rights reserved. pollution is the introduction of harmful materials into the environment. these harmful materials are called pollutants. grades subjectsbiology ecology health earth science geographycontents imagespollution is the introduction of harmful materials into the environment. these harmful materials are called pollutants. pollutants can be natural such as volcanic ash. they can also be created by human activity such as trash or runoff produced by factories. pollutants damage the quality of air water and land. many things that are useful to people produce pollution. cars spew pollutants from their exhaust pipes. burning coal to create electricity pollutes the air. industries and homes generate garbage and sewage that can pollute the land and water. pesticideschemical poisons used to kill weeds and insectsseep into waterways and harm wildlife. all living thingsfrom one celled microbes to blue whalesdepend on earth s supply of air and water. when these resources are polluted all forms of life are threatened. pollution is a global problem. although urban areas are usually more polluted than the countryside pollution can spread to remote places where no people live. for example pesticides and other chemicals have been found in the antarctic ice sheet. in the middle of the northern pacific ocean a huge collection of microscopic plastic particles forms what is known as the great pacific garbage patch. air and water currents carry pollution. ocean currents and migrating fish carry marine pollutants far and wide. winds can pick up radioactive material accidentally released from a nuclear reactor and scatter it around the world. smoke from a factory in one country drifts into another country. in the past visitors to big bend national park in the u. s. state of texas could see kilometers across the vast landscape. now coal burning power plants in texas and the neighboring state of chihuahua mexico have spewed so much pollution into the air that visitors to big bend can sometimes see only kilometers. the three major types of pollution are air pollution water pollution and land pollution. air pollutionsometimes air pollution is visible. a person can see dark smoke pour from the exhaust pipes of large trucks or factories for example. more often however air pollution is invisible. polluted air can be dangerous even if the pollutants are invisible. it can make people s eyes burn and make them have difficulty breathing. it can also increase the risk of lung cancer. sometimes air pollution kills quickly. in an accident at a pesticide plant in bhopal india released a deadly gas into the air. at least people died within days. hundreds of thousands more were permanently injured. natural disasters can also cause air pollution to increase quickly. when volcanoes erupt they eject volcanic ash and gases into the atmosphere. volcanic ash can discolor the sky for months. after the eruption of the indonesian volcano of krakatoa in ash darkened the sky around the world. the dimmer sky caused fewer crops to be harvested as far away as europe and north america. for years meteorologists tracked what was known as the equatorial smoke stream. in fact this smoke stream was a jet stream a wind high in earth s atmosphere that krakatoa s air pollution made visible. volcanic gases such as sulfur dioxide can kill nearby residents and make the soil infertile for years. mount vesuvius a volcano in italy famously erupted in killing hundreds of residents of the nearby towns of pompeii and herculaneum. most victims of vesuvius were not killed by lava or landslides caused by the eruption. they were choked or asphyxiated by deadly volcanic gases. in a toxic cloud developed over lake nyos cameroon. lake nyos sits in the crater of a volcano. though the volcano did not erupt it did eject volcanic gases into the lake. the heated gases passed through the water of the lake and collected as a cloud that descended the slopes of the volcano and into nearby valleys. as the toxic cloud moved across the landscape it killed birds and other organisms in their natural habitat. this air pollution also killed thousands of cattle and as many as people. most air pollution is not natural however. it comes from burning fossil fuelscoal oil and natural gas. when gasoline is burned to power cars and trucks it produces carbon monoxide a colorless odorless gas. the gas is harmful in high concentrations or amounts. city traffic produces highly concentrated carbon monoxide. cars and factories produce other common pollutants including nitrogen oxide sulfur dioxide and hydrocarbons. these chemicals react with sunlight to produce smog a thick fog or haze of air pollution. the smog is so thick in linfen china that people can seldom see the sun. smog can be brown or grayish blue depending on which pollutants are in it. smog makes breathing difficult especially for children and older adults. some cities that suffer from extreme smog issue air pollution warnings. the government of hong kong for example will warn people not to go outside or engage in strenuous physical activity when smog is very thick. when air pollutants such as nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide mix with moisture they change into acids. they then fall back to earth as acid rain. wind often carries acid rain far from the pollution source. pollutants produced by factories and power plants in spain can fall as acid rain in norway. acid rain can kill all the trees in a forest. it can also devastate lakes streams and other waterways. when lakes become acidic fish can t survive. in sweden acid rain created thousands of dead lakes where fish no longer live. acid rain also wears away marble and other kinds of stone. it has erased the words on gravestones and damaged many historic buildings and monuments. the taj mahal in agra india was once gleaming white. years of exposure to acid rain has left it pale. governments have tried to prevent acid rain by limiting the amount of pollutants released into the air. in europe and north america they have had some success but acid rain remains a major problem in the developing world especially asia. greenhouse gases are another source of air pollution. greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane occur naturally in the atmosphere. in fact they are necessary for life on earth. they absorb sunlight reflected from earth preventing it from escaping into space. by trapping heat in the atmosphere they keep earth warm enough for people to live. this is called the greenhouse effect. but human activities such as burning fossil fuels and destroying forests have increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. this has increased the greenhouse effect and average temperatures across the globe are rising. the decade that began in the year was the warmest on record. this increase in worldwide average temperatures caused in part by human activity is called global warming. global warming is causing ice sheets and glaciers to melt. the melting ice is causing sea levels to rise at a rate of millimeters per year. the rising seas will eventually flood low lying coastal regions. entire nations such as the islands of maldives are threatened by this climate change. global warming also contributes to the phenomenon of ocean acidification. ocean acidification is the process of ocean waters absorbing more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. fewer organisms can survive in warmer less salty waters. the ocean food web is threatened as plants and animals such as coral fail to adapt to more acidic oceans. scientists have predicted that global warming will cause an increase in severe storms. it will also cause more droughts in some regions and more flooding in others. the change in average temperatures is already shrinking some habitats the regions where plants and animals naturally live. polar bears hunt seals from sea ice in the arctic. the melting ice is forcing polar bears to travel farther to find food and their numbers are shrinking. people and governments can respond quickly and effectively to reduce air pollution. chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons are a dangerous form of air pollution that governments worked to reduce in the s and s. cfcs are found in gases that cool refrigerators in foam products and in aerosol cans. cfcs damage the ozone layer a region in earth s upper atmosphere. the ozone layer protects earth by absorbing much of the sun s harmful ultraviolet radiation. when people are exposed to more ultraviolet radiation they are more likely to develop skin cancer eye diseases and other illnesses. in the s scientists noticed that the ozone layer over antarctica was thinning. this is often called the ozone hole. no one lives permanently in antarctica. but australia the home of more than million people lies at the edge of the hole. in the s the australian government began an effort to warn people of the dangers of too much sun. many countries including the united states now severely limit the production of cfcs. water pollutionsome polluted water looks muddy smells bad and has garbage floating in it. some polluted water looks clean but is filled with harmful chemicals you can t see or smell. polluted water is unsafe for drinking and swimming. some people who drink polluted water are exposed to hazardous chemicals that may make them sick years later. others consume bacteria and other tiny aquatic organisms that cause disease. the united nations estimates that children die every day from drinking dirty water. sometimes polluted water harms people indirectly. they get sick because the fish that live in polluted water are unsafe to eat. they have too many pollutants in their flesh. there are some natural sources of water pollution. oil and natural gas for example can leak into oceans and lakes from natural underground sources. these sites are called petroleum seeps. the world s largest petroleum seep is the coal oil point seep off the coast of the u. s. state of california. the coal oil point seep releases so much oil that tar balls wash up on nearby beaches. tar balls are small sticky pieces of pollution that eventually decompose in the ocean. human activity also contributes to water pollution. chemicals and oils from factories are sometimes dumped or seep into waterways. these chemicals are called runoff. chemicals in runoff can create a toxic environment for aquatic life. runoff can also help create a fertile environment for cyanobacteria also called blue green algae. cyanobacteria reproduce rapidly creating a harmful algal bloom. harmful algal blooms prevent organisms such as plants and fish from living in the ocean. they are associated with dead zones in the world s lakes and rivers places where little life exists below surface water. mining and drilling can also contribute to water pollution. acid mine drainage is a major contributor to pollution of rivers and streams near coal mines. acid helps miners remove coal from the surrounding rocks. the acid is washed into streams and rivers where it reacts with rocks and sand. it releases chemical sulfur from the rocks and sand creating a river rich in sulfuric acid. sulfuric acid is toxic to plants fish and other aquatic organisms. sulfuric acid is also toxic to people making rivers polluted by amd dangerous sources of water for drinking and hygiene. oil spills are another source of water pollution. in april the deepwater horizon oil rig exploded in the gulf of mexico causing oil to gush from the ocean floor. in the following months hundreds of millions of gallons of oil spewed into the gulf waters. the spill produced large plumes of oil under the sea and an oil slick on the surface as large as square kilometers. the oil slick coated wetlands in the u. s. states of louisiana and mississippi killing marsh plants and aquatic organisms such as crabs and fish. birds such as pelicans became coated in oil and were unable to fly or access food. more than million animals died as a result of the deepwater horizon oil spill. buried chemical waste can also pollute water supplies. for many years people disposed of chemical wastes carelessly not realizing its dangers. in the s people living in the love canal area in niagara falls new york suffered from extremely high rates of cancer and birth defects. it was discovered that a chemical waste dump had poisoned the area s water. in families living in love canal had to abandon their homes. if not disposed of properly radioactive waste from nuclear power plants can escape into the environment. radioactive waste can harm living things and pollute the water. sewage that has not been properly treated is a common source of water pollution. many cities around the world have poor sewage systems and sewage treatment plants. delhi the capital of india is home to more than million people. more than half the sewage and other waste produced in the city are dumped into the yamuna river. this pollution makes the river dangerous to use as a source of water for drinking or hygiene. it also reduces the river s fishery resulting in less food for the local community. a major source of water pollution is fertilizer used in agriculture. fertilizer is material added to soil to make plants grow larger and faster. fertilizers usually contain large amounts of the elements nitrogen and phosphorus which help plants grow. rainwater washes fertilizer into streams and lakes. there the nitrogen and phosphorus cause cyanobacteria to form harmful algal blooms. rain washes other pollutants into streams and lakes. it picks up animal waste from cattle ranches. cars drip oil onto the street and rain carries it into storm drains which lead to waterways such as rivers and seas. rain sometimes washes chemical pesticides off of plants and into streams. pesticides can also seep into groundwater the water beneath the surface of the earth. heat can pollute water. power plants for example produce a huge amount of heat. power plants are often located on rivers so they can use the water as a coolant. cool water circulates through the plant absorbing heat. the heated water is then returned to the river. aquatic creatures are sensitive to changes in temperature. some fish for example can only live in cold water. warmer river temperatures prevent fish eggs from hatching. warmer river water also contributes to harmful algal blooms. another type of water pollution is simple garbage. the citarum river in indonesia for example has so much garbage floating in it that you can not see the water. floating trash makes the river difficult to fish in. aquatic animals such as fish and turtles mistake trash such as plastic bags for food. plastic bags and twine can kill many ocean creatures. chemical pollutants in trash can also pollute the water making it toxic for fish and people who use the river as a source of drinking water. the fish that are caught in a polluted river often have high levels of chemical toxins in their flesh. people absorb these toxins as they eat the fish. garbage also fouls the ocean. many plastic bottles and other pieces of trash are thrown overboard from boats. the wind blows trash out to sea. ocean currents carry plastics and other floating trash to certain places on the globe where it can not escape. the largest of these areas called the great pacific garbage patch is in a remote part of the pacific ocean. according to some estimates this garbage patch is the size of texas. the trash is a threat to fish and seabirds which mistake the plastic for food. many of the plastics are covered with chemical pollutants. land pollutionmany of the same pollutants that foul the water also harm the land. mining sometimes leaves the soil contaminated with dangerous chemicals. pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural fields are blown by the wind. they can harm plants animals and sometimes people. some fruits and vegetables absorb the pesticides that help them grow. when people consume the fruits and vegetables the pesticides enter their bodies. some pesticides can cause cancer and other diseases. a pesticide called ddt was once commonly used to kill insects especially mosquitoes. in many parts of the world mosquitoes carry a disease called malaria which kills a million people every year. swiss chemist paul hermann muller was awarded the nobel prize for his understanding of how ddt can control insects and other pests. ddt is responsible for reducing malaria in places such as taiwan and sri lanka. in american biologist rachel carson wrote a book called silent spring which discussed the dangers of ddt. she argued that it could contribute to cancer in humans. she also explained how it was destroying bird eggs which caused the number of bald eagles brown pelicans and ospreys to drop. in the united states banned the use of ddt. many other countries also banned it. but ddt didn t disappear entirely. today many governments support the use of ddt because it remains the most effective way to combat malaria. trash is another form of land pollution. around the world paper cans glass jars plastic products and junked cars and appliances mar the landscape. litter makes it difficult for plants and other producers in the food web to create nutrients. animals can die if they mistakenly eat plastic. garbage often contains dangerous pollutants such as oils chemicals and ink. these pollutants can leech into the soil and harm plants animals and people. inefficient garbage collection systems contribute to land pollution. often the garbage is picked up and brought to a dump or landfill. garbage is buried in landfills. sometimes communities produce so much garbage that their landfills are filling up. they are running out of places to dump their trash. a massive landfill near quezon city philippines was the site of a land pollution tragedy in. hundreds of people lived on the slopes of the quezon city landfill. these people made their living from recycling and selling items found in the landfill. however the landfill was not secure. heavy rains caused a trash landslide killing people. sometimes landfills are not completely sealed off from the land around them. pollutants from the landfill leak into the earth in which they are buried. plants that grow in the earth may be contaminated and the herbivores that eat the plants also become contaminated. so do the predators that consume the herbivores. this process where a chemical builds up in each level of the food web is called bioaccumulation. pollutants leaked from landfills also leak into local groundwater supplies. there the aquatic food web can suffer from bioaccumulation of toxic chemicals. some communities do not have adequate garbage collection systems and trash lines the side of roads. in other places garbage washes up on beaches. kamilo beach in the u. s. state of hawaii is littered with plastic bags and bottles carried in by the tide. the trash is dangerous to ocean life and reduces economic activity in the area. tourism is hawaii s largest industry. polluted beaches discourage tourists from investing in the area s hotels restaurants and recreational activities. some cities incinerate or burn their garbage. incinerating trash gets rid of it but it can release dangerous heavy metals and chemicals into the air. so while trash incinerators can help with the problem of land pollution they sometimes add to the problem of air pollution. reducing pollutionaround the world people and governments are making efforts to combat pollution. recycling for instance is becoming more common. in recycling trash is processed so its useful materials can be used again. glass aluminum cans and many types of plastic can be melted and reused. paper can be broken down and turned into new paper. recycling reduces the amount of garbage that ends up in landfills incinerators and waterways. austria and switzerland have the highest recycling rates. these nations recycle between and percent of their garbage. the united states recycles about percent of its garbage. governments can combat pollution by passing laws that limit the amount and types of chemicals factories and agribusinesses are allowed to use. the smoke from coal burning power plants can be filtered. people and businesses that illegally dump pollutants into the land water and air can be fined for millions of dollars. some government programs such as the superfund program in the united states can force polluters to clean up the sites they polluted. international agreements can also reduce pollution. the kyoto protocol a united nations agreement to limit the emission of greenhouse gases has been signed by countries. the united states the world s second largest producer of greenhouse gases did not sign the agreement. other countries such as china the world s largest producer of greenhouse gases have not met their goals. still many gains have been made. in the cuyahoga river in the u. s. state of ohio was so clogged with oil and trash that it caught on fire. the fire helped spur the clean water act of. this law limited what pollutants could be released into water and set standards for how clean water should be. today the cuyahoga river is much cleaner. fish have returned to regions of the river where they once could not survive. but even as some rivers are becoming cleaner others are becoming more polluted. as countries around the world become wealthier some forms of pollution increase. countries with growing economies usually need more power plants which produce more pollutants. reducing pollution requires environmental political and economic leadership. developed nations must work to reduce and recycle their materials while developing nations must work to strengthen their economies without destroying the environment. developed and developing countries must work together toward the common goal of protecting the environment for future use. photograph by dennis finleylight pollutionlight pollution is the excess amount of light in the night sky. light pollution also called photopollution is almost always found in urban areas. light pollution can disrupt ecosystems by confusing the distinction between night and day. nocturnal animals those that are active at night may venture out during the day while diurnal animals which are active during daylight hours may remain active well into the night. feeding and sleep patterns may be confused. light pollution also indicates an excess use of energy. the dark sky movement is a campaign by people to reduce light pollution. this would reduce energy use allow ecosystems to function more normally and allow scientists and stargazers to observe the atmosphere. noise pollutionnoise pollution is the constant presence of loud disruptive noises in an area. usually noise pollution is caused by construction or nearby transportation facilities such as airports. noise pollution is unpleasant and can be dangerous. some songbirds such as robins are unable to communicate or find food in the presence of heavy noise pollution. the sound waves produced by some noise pollutants can disrupt the sonar used by marine animals to communicate or locate food. how long does it last different materials decompose at different rates. how long does it take for these common types of trash to break down indoor air pollutionthe air inside your house can be polluted. air and carpet cleaners insect sprays and cigarettes are all sources of indoor air pollution. to soak up. chemical compound that reacts with a base to form a salt. acids can corrode some natural materials. acids have ph levels lower than. flow of acid or acidic liquid from metal mines or coal mines. precipitation with high levels of nitric and sulfuric acids. acid rain can be manmade or occur naturally. to adjust to new surroundings or a new situation. suitable or good enough. container of liquid material under high pressure. when released through a small opening the liquid becomes a spray or foam. the strategy of applying profit making practices to the operation of farms and ranches. the art and science of cultivating land for growing crops or raising livestock. harmful chemicals in the atmosphere. diverse group of aquatic organisms the largest of which are seaweeds. silvery reflective metallic element with the symbol al. region at earths extreme south encompassed by the antarctic circle. having to do with water. to choke or suffocate. layers of gases surrounding a planet or other celestial body. single celled organisms found in every ecosystem on earth. to prohibit or not allow. narrow strip of land that lies along a body of water. process by which chemicals are absorbed by an organism either from exposure to a substance with the chemical or by consumption of food containing the chemical. scientist who studies living organisms. physical disorder present at birth and not developed later. type of aquatic bacteria that can photosynthesize light to create energy. also called cyanobacteria and pond scum. growth of abnormal cells in the body. city where a regions government is located. greenhouse gas produced by animals during respiration and used by plants during photosynthesis. carbon dioxide is also the byproduct of burning fossil fuels. colorless odorless and tasteless gas that is slightly less dense than air. it can be toxic to humans. cows and oxen. chemical compound mostly used in refrigerants and flame retardants. some cfcs have destructive effects on the ozone layer. to move around often in a pattern. federal law protecting water from pollution. gradual changes in all the interconnected weather elements on our planet. visible mass of tiny water droplets or ice crystals in earths atmosphere. dark solid fossil fuel mined from the earth. place in the pacific ocean off the coast of the u. s. state of california that naturally emits gases such as methane a seep field. edge of land along the sea or other large body of water. to fight. measure of the amount of a substance or grouping in a specific place. to use up. to poison or make hazardous. substance usually a liquid or gas that reduces the temperature of a system or piece of machinery. tiny ocean animal some of which secrete calcium carbonate to form reefs. bowl shaped depression formed by a volcanic eruption or impact of a meteorite. agricultural produce. steady predictable flow of fluid within a larger body of that fluid. type of aquatic bacteria that can photosynthesize light to create energy. also called blue green algae and pond scum. toxic chemical used as an insecticide but illegal for most uses in the u. s. since. body of water where fish or other aquatic organisms no longer live beneath the surface due to natural or manmade pollution. area of low oxygen in a body of water. years. to decay or break down. oil rig in the gulf of mexico that exploded in. to go from a higher to a lower place. to destroy. nations with low per capita income little infrastructure and a small middle class. to disapprove or encourage someone not to do something. to throw away or get rid of. dull or boring. to make a hole using a rotating digging tool. period of greatly reduced precipitation. our planet the third from the sun. the earth is the only place in the known universe that supports life. having to do with money. to get rid of or throw out. set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and flow of electric charge. conditions that surround and influence an organism or community. to explode or suddenly eject material. gases and particles expelled from an engine. to eject or force out. one or more buildings used for the manufacture of a product. nutrient rich chemical substance applied to soil to encourage plant growth. to punish usually by charging an economic penalty or fee. or the penalty or fee itself. industry or occupation of harvesting fish either in the wild or through aquaculture. overflow of a body of water onto land. clouds at ground level. material usually of plant or animal origin that living organisms use to obtain nutrients. all related food chains in an ecosystem. also called a food cycle. ecosystem filled with trees and underbrush. coal oil or natural gas. fossil fuels formed from the remains of ancient plants and animals. liquid mixture made from oil and used to run many motor vehicles. to create or begin. mass of ice that moves slowly over land. to shine brightly. increase in the average temperature of the earths air and oceans. system or order of a nation state or other political unit. stone marking a persons burial place often engraved with the persons name and dates of birth and death. area of the north pacific ocean where currents have trapped huge amounts of debris mostly plastics. phenomenon where gases allow sunlight to enter earths atmosphere but make it difficult for heat to escape. gas in the atmosphere such as carbon dioxide methane water vapor and ozone that absorbs solar heat reflected by the surface of the earth warming the atmosphere. water found in an aquifer. environment where an organism lives throughout the year or for shorter periods of time. damaging. rapid growth of algae bacteria or other plankton that can threaten an aquatic environment by reducing the amount of oxygen in the water blocking sunlight or releasing toxic chemicals. the gathering and collection of crops including both plants and animals. danger or risk. group of solid and liquid particles in the air that makes it difficult to see. chemical substance with a specific gravity of at least.. organism that eats mainly plants and other producers. chemical compound made entirely of the elements hydrogen and carbon. science and methods of keeping clean and healthy. thick layer of glacial ice that covers a large area of land. to burn up entirely. activity that produces goods and services. not able to perform a task well. unproductive or barren. dark liquid used for printing or artwork. to contribute time or money. unable to be seen. body of land surrounded by water. to distribute give away or sell. winds speeding through the upper atmosphere. island in indonesia site of major volcanic eruption in. also called krakatau. international agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. body of water surrounded by land. site where garbage is layered with dirt and other absorbing material to prevent contamination of the surrounding land or water. introduction of harmful materials into the surface environment. the geographic features of a region. the fall of rocks soil and other materials from a mountain hill or slope. molten rock or magma that erupts from volcanoes or fissures in the earths surface. public rule. carnivorous or bloodsucking worm. new york town and the site of a former toxic waste dump. organ in an animal that is necessary for breathing. infectious disease caused by a parasite carried by mosquitoes. to spoil or damage. type of metamorphic rock. having to do with the ocean. wetland area usually covered by a shallow layer of seawater or freshwater. very large or heavy. person who studies patterns and changes in earths atmosphere. chemical compound that is the basic ingredient of natural gas. tiny organism usually a bacterium. very small. to extract minerals from the earth. process of extracting ore from the earth. large structure representing an event idea or person. political unit made of people who share a common territory. an event occurring naturally that has large scale effects on the environment and people such as a volcano earthquake or hurricane. type of fossil fuel made up mostly of the gas methane. chemical element with the symbol n whose gas form is of the earths atmosphere. one of many chemical compounds made of different combinations of nitrogen and oxygen. one of five awards established by the swedish businessman alfred nobel in. nobel prizes are awarded in physics chemistry medicine literature and peace. substance an organism needs for energy growth and life. decrease in the oceans ph levels caused primarily by increased carbon dioxide. ocean acidification threatens corals and shellfish. fossil fuel formed from the remains of marine plants and animals. also known as petroleum or crude oil. complex series of machinery and systems used to drill for oil on land. smooth dark coating on the surface of a body of water caused by an oil spill or leak. accidental release of petroleum products into a body of water either by an oil tanker or an offshore oil rig. circular pattern usually located near the antarctic of thin atmospheric ozone which absorbs harmful ultraviolet sunlight. layer in the atmosphere containing the gas ozone which absorbs most of the suns ultraviolet radiation. small piece of material. swiss chemist and businessman. large marine bird with a big bill. constant or lasting forever. natural or manufactured substance used to kill organisms that threaten agriculture or are undesirable. pesticides can be fungicides insecticides herbicides or rodenticides fossil fuel formed from the remains of ancient organisms. also called crude oil. place where oil or natural gas from the earths interior leaks to the surface naturally. an unusual act or occurrence. chemical element with the symbol p. chemical material that can be easily shaped when heated to a high temperature. single upward flow of a fluid such as water or smoke. substance that harms health. chemical or other substance that harms a natural resource. introduction of harmful materials into the environment. industrial facility for the generation of electric energy. animal that hunts other animals for food. american biologist and author. having unstable atomic nuclei and emitting subatomic particles and radiation. liquid precipitation. to clean or process in order to make suitable for reuse. to lower or lessen. any area on earth with one or more common characteristics. regions are the basic units of geography. distant or far away. available supply of materials goods or services. resources can be natural or human. to use again. natural substance composed of solid mineral matter. overflow of fluid from a farm or industrial factory. small loose grains of disintegrated rocks. frozen ocean water. base level for measuring elevations. sea level is determined by measurements taken over a year cycle. to slowly flow through a border. not very often. liquid and solid waste material from homes and businesses. process of removing harmful pollutants and contaminants from water discarded by homes and businesses so the water is safe for most uses. nonfiction book by rachel carson that documented the consequences of a polluted environment especially the use of the pesticide ddt. type of air pollution common in manufacturing areas or areas with high traffic. gases given off by a burning substance. top layer of the earths surface where plants can grow. to eject or discharge violently. piece of rock. severe weather indicating a disturbed state of the atmosphere resulting from uplifted air. system to empty streets of excess rainwater. storm drains flow into local creeks rivers or seas. body of flowing water. energetic or requiring a lot of activity. chemical element with the symbol s. greenhouse gas that can cause acid rain. toxic chemical made of hydrogen sulfur and oxygen. federal program to clean up hazardous waste sites in the u. s. also called the comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act. to live. large white mausoleum complex in agra india built by shah jahan for his wife mumtaz. small sticky piece of tar emitted by a natural or manmade oil spill that floats in the ocean and often washes up on beaches. degree of hotness or coldness measured by a thermometer with a numerical scale. rise and fall of the oceans waters caused by the gravitational pull of the moon and sun. the industry of traveling for pleasure. poisonous. movement of many things often vehicles in a specific area. type of large plant with a thick trunk and branches. strong thread made from at least two strings twisted together often made of plastic. powerful light waves that are too short for humans to see but can penetrate earths atmosphere. ultraviolet is often shortened to uv. international organization that works for peace security and cooperation. developed densely populated area where most inhabitants have nonagricultural jobs. depression in the earth between hills. huge and spread out. able to be seen. fragments of lava less than millimeters across. gas such as water vapor or carbon dioxide that is released into the atmosphere by a volcano. an opening in the earths crust through which lava ash and gases erupt and also the cone built by eruptions. introduction of harmful materials into a body of water. body of water that serves as a route for transportation. area of land covered by shallow water or saturated by water. organisms living in a natural environment. movement of air caused by the uneven heating of the earth by the sun. imagesinteractiveswebsitesthe audio illustrations photos and videos are credited beneath the media asset except for promotional images which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. the rights holder for media is the person or group credited. diane boudreau melissa mcdaniel erin sprout andrew turgeon mary crooks national geographic society tim gunther illustrator jeannie evers emdash editing kara west nancy wynne caryl sue national geographic society dunn margery g... exploring your world the adventure of geography. washington d. c. national geographic society. aug. for information on user permissions please read our terms of service. if you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation please contact your teacher. they will best know the preferred format. when you reach out to them you will need the page title url and the date you accessed the resource. if a media asset is downloadable a download button appears in the corner of the media viewer. if no button appears you can not download or save the media. text on this page is printable and can be used according to our terms of service. any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. you can not download interactives. in the united nations general assembly adopted sustainable development goals designed to transform our world by. the sixth goal is to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. according to the united nations one in three people live without sanitation. a lack of sanitation and sanitary waste management systems can reduce a communitys access to clean water and lack of access to clean water can allow diseases to run rampant sometimes creating epidemics of water borne infectious agents. learning about how freshwater systems work in the wilderness rural communities and urban centers can help us better understand the challenges of providing clean water and sanitation to people around the world. humans impact the physical environment in many ways overpopulation pollution burning fossil fuels and deforestation. changes like these have triggered climate change soil erosion poor air quality and undrinkable water. these negative impacts can affect human behavior and can prompt mass migrations or battles over clean water. help your students understand the impact humans have on the physical environment with these classroom resources. plastic is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. some plastics we can reuse or recycleand many play important roles in areas like medicine and public safetybut other items such as straws are designed for only one use. in fact more than percent of plastic is used only once before it is thrown away where it lingers in the environment for a long long time. it often breaks down into smaller and smaller particles called microplastics which can be ingested by both animals and people. fortunately there are things we can do to helplike stop using plastic bags straws and bottles recycling when we can and disposing of waste properly. use these classroom resources to teach about ocean plastics and check back for more coming later this year for the purposes of regulation the united states environmental protection agency identifies two broad categories of pollution point source pollution and nonpoint source pollution. air pollution consists of chemicals or particles in the air that can harm the health of humans animals and plants. it also damages buildings. watch this brief video picture of practice that captures everyday classroom life and provides real life examples of how students learn and think about freshwater topics. in the united nations general assembly adopted sustainable development goals designed to transform our world by. the sixth goal is to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. according to the united nations one in three people live without sanitation. a lack of sanitation and sanitary waste management systems can reduce a communitys access to clean water and lack of access to clean water can allow diseases to run rampant sometimes creating epidemics of water borne infectious agents. learning about how freshwater systems work in the wilderness rural communities and urban centers can help us better understand the challenges of providing clean water and sanitation to people around the world. humans impact the physical environment in many ways overpopulation pollution burning fossil fuels and deforestation. changes like these have triggered climate change soil erosion poor air quality and undrinkable water. these negative impacts can affect human behavior and can prompt mass migrations or battles over clean water. help your students understand the impact humans have on the physical environment with these classroom resources. plastic is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. some plastics we can reuse or recycleand many play important roles in areas like medicine and public safetybut other items such as straws are designed for only one use. in fact more than percent of plastic is used only once before it is thrown away where it lingers in the environment for a long long time. it often breaks down into smaller and smaller particles called microplastics which can be ingested by both animals and people. fortunately there are things we can do to helplike stop using plastic bags straws and bottles recycling when we can and disposing of waste properly. use these classroom resources to teach about ocean plastics and check back for more coming later this year for the purposes of regulation the united states environmental protection agency identifies two broad categories of pollution point source pollution and nonpoint source pollution. air pollution consists of chemicals or particles in the air that can harm the health of humans animals and plants. it also damages buildings. watch this brief video picture of practice that captures everyday classroom life and provides real life examples of how students learn and think about freshwater topics. national geographic headquarters street nw washington dc careers newsroom privacy notice sustainability policy terms of service code of ethics contact usnational geographic society is a organization. national geographic society. all rights reserved. join our community of educators and receive the latest information on national geographics resources for you and your students. byalina bradford february pollution is the process of making land water air or other parts of the environment dirty and not safe or suitable to use. this can be done through the introduction of a contaminant into a natural environment but the contaminant doesnt need to be tangible. things as simple as light sound and temperature can be considered pollutants when introduced artificially into an environment. toxic pollution affects more than million people worldwide according to pure earth a non profit environmental organization. in some of the worlds worst polluted places babies are born with birth defects children have lost to iq points and life expectancy may be as low as years because of cancers and other diseases. read on to find out more about specific types of pollution. land can become polluted by household garbage and by industrial waste. in americans produced about million tons of solid waste according to the u. s. environmental protection agency. a little over half of the waste million tons was gathered in landfills. only about was recycled or composted. organic material was the largest component of the garbage generated the epa said. paper and paperboard accounted for more than food was and yard trimmings were. plastics comprised about of the solid waste while rubber leather and textiles made up. and metals. wood contributed to. of the garbage glass was. and other miscellaneous materials made up about. commercial or industrial waste is a significant portion of solid waste. according to the university of utah industries use million pounds of materials in order to provide the average american family with needed products for one year. much of it is classified as non hazardous such as construction material and medical waste. hazardous waste is any liquid solid or sludge waste that contain properties that are dangerous of potentially harmful to human health or the environment. industries generate hazardous waste from mining petroleum refining pesticide manufacturing and other chemical production. households generate hazardous waste as well including paints and solvents motor oil fluorescent lights aerosol cans and ammunition. water pollution happens when chemicals or dangerous foreign substances are introduced to water including chemicals sewage pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural runoff or metals like lead or mercury. according to the environmental protection agency of assessed stream miles of lakes and of bay and estuarine areas are not clean enough for fishing and swimming. the epa also states that the united states most common contaminants are bacteria mercury phosphorus and nitrogen. these come from the most common sources of contaminates that include agricultural runoff air deposition water diversions and channelization of streams. water pollution isnt just a problem for the united states. according to united nations million people do not have access to clean water and around. billion do not have access to adequate sanitation. adequate sanitation helps to keep sewage and other contaminants from entering the water supply. according to national oceanic and atmospheric administration of pollution in marine environment comes from the land through sources like runoff. water pollution can also severely affect marine life. for example sewage causes pathogens to grow while organic and inorganic compounds in water can change the composition of the precious resource. according to the epa low levels of dissolved oxygen in the water are also considered a pollutant. dissolved is caused by the decomposition of organic materials such as sewage introduced into the water. warming water can also be harmful. the artificial warming of water is called thermal pollution. it can happen when a factory or power plant that is using water to cool its operations ends up discharging hot water. this makes the water hold less oxygen which can kill fish and wildlife. the sudden change of temperature in the body of water can also kill fish. according to the university of georgia it is estimated that around half of the water withdrawn from water systems in the united states each year is used for cooling electric power plants. in nearly all cases of this water is returned to its source where it can raise the water temperature in an area immediately surrounding the water discharge pipe. depending on water flow the water temperature quickly returns to ambient temperatures that do not harm fish. donn dears former president of tsaugust a not for profit corporation organization focused on energy issues told live science. nutrient pollution also called eutrophication is another type of water pollution. it is when nutrients such as nitrogen are added into bodies of water. the nutrient works like fertilizer and makes algae grow at excessive rates according to noaa. the algae blocks light from other plants. the plants die and their decomposition leads to less oxygen in the water. less oxygen in the water kills aquatic animals. the air we breathe has a very exact chemical composition of it is made up of nitrogen oxygen water vapor and inert gases. air pollution occurs when things that arent normally there are added to the air. a common type of air pollution happens when people release particles into the air from burning fuels. this pollution looks like soot containing millions of tiny particles floating in the air. another common type of air pollution is dangerous gases such as sulfur dioxide carbon monoxide nitrogen oxides and chemical vapors. these can take part in further chemical reactions once they are in the atmosphere creating acid rain and smog. other sources of air pollution can come from within buildings such as secondhand smoke. finally air pollution can take the form of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide or sulfur dioxide which are warming the planet through the greenhouse effect. according to the epa the greenhouse effect is when gases absorb the infrared radiation that is released from the earth preventing the heat from escaping. this is a natural process that keeps our atmosphere warm. if too many gases are introduced into the atmosphere though more heat is trapped and this can make the planet artificially warm according to columbia university. air pollution kills more than million people each year according to a study published in the journal of environmental research letters. the effects of air pollution on human health can vary widely depending on the pollutant according to hugh sealy professor and director of the environmental and occupational health track at the department of public health and preventive medicine st. georges university st. georges grenada. if the pollutant is highly toxic the effects on health can be widespread and severe. for example the release of methyl isocyanate gas at union carbide plant in bhopal in killed over people and over suffered respiratory problems. an irritant may cause respiratory illnesses cardiovascular disease and increases in asthma. the very young the old and those with vulnerable immune systems are most at risk from air pollution. the air pollutant may be carcinogenic or biologically active or radioactive. other air pollutants like carbon dioxide have an indirect impact on human health through climate change sealy told live science. even though humans cant see or smell noise pollution it still affects the environment. noise pollution happens when the sound coming from planes industry or other sources reaches harmful levels. research has shown that there are direct links between noise and health including stress related illnesses high blood pressure speech interference hearing loss. for example a study bythe who noise environmental burden on disease working group found that noise pollution may contribute to hundreds of thousands of deaths per year by increasing the rates of coronary heart disease. under the clean air act the epa can regulate machine and plane noise. underwater noise pollution coming from ships has been shown to upset whales navigation systems and kill other species that depend on the natural underwater world. noise also makes wild species communicate louder which can shorten their lifespan. most people cant imagine living without the modern convenience of electric lights. for the natural world though lights have changed the way that days and nights work. some consequences of light pollution are turning on so many lights may not be necessary. research published by international journal of science and research estimates that over illumination wastes about million barrels of oil per day and lighting is responsible for one fourth of all energy consumption worldwide. additional resourcesstay up to date on the latest science news by signing up for our essentials newsletter. thank you for signing up to live science. you will receive a verification email shortly. there was a problem. please refresh the page and try again. live science is part of future us inc an international media group and leading digital publisher. visit our corporate site. future us inc. west street floor new york ny. select pagea lot of factors like industrialization inefficient garbage disposal littering etc could cause pollution. a number of factories are set up near water bodies for the ease of operation and the waste produced by such factories as bumped into the water bodies. it is extremely harmful if the water is consumed or used. pollution is the contamination of the environment and atmosphere where do we live and make it unable to live in a healthy way. we have provided below short and long essays on pollution in english for your knowledge and information. after going through the essays you will know what pollution is and what are its main causes how to stop pollution its prevention etc. these essays will be helpful in your school college assignments of essay writing speech giving or paragraph writing etc. pollution refers to the presence of contaminants in the natural environment. some of the examples of polluting substances are gases like carbon dioxide carbon monoxide etc solid pollutants like plastic sewage etc and chemicals like fertilizers as well as those produced as byproduct in factories transportation etc. the immediate effect of pollution is that it renders earth s natural resources unusable or in other words harmful to use as well as it also causes species depletion and ecological imbalance. it is very necessary to take essential precautionary and pro active measures to prevent any further damage that will happen due to pollution to earth and its inhabitants. introductionpollution today has become a global concern for the health of the environment as well as the flora and fauna on the planet. pollution has a widespread effect on the environment including the natural resources. it makes the natural elements polluted and harmful to use ultimately making the life on planet suffer. what is pollution when a polluting substance enters into our natural environment and contaminates it this process is called pollution. these pollutants are mostly formed due to several human activities mostly economical in nature. to state few examples carbon monoxide released by transportation vehicles pollute the air trail of oil left by big ocean liners pollute the ocean and makes water harmful for aquatic life. conclusionpollution is the immediate threat that the environment faces today and is also the most prominent one. the clock is ticking continuously and with every passing moment the damage to the environment is increasing. immediate action to preserve the environment against pollution is needed to be taken by the government and other stake holders. introductionin a lay man terms pollution occurs when something unwanted enters into your natural environment. the release of toxic gas on burning of plastic is pollution mixing of harmful chemicals with the soil when it is mixed with chemical fertilizers is pollution when the disposed waste from your house somehow reaches into the open environment it cause pollution. similarly there could be several other examples of pollution. as for now we will discuss below the types of pollution. types of pollutionthe five major types of pollution are given below air pollutionits main source is the burning of fossil fuels by the transportation vehicles and smoke emanated from the factories. water pollutionits main source is the runoff water from urban settlements agricultural fields and release of byproducts from factories. soil pollutionsoil pollution could be caused from several factors like improper disposal of waste use of harmful chemicals in agriculture industry etc. light pollutionlight pollution refers to more than required presence of light in a polluted area which is large enough to interfere with the natural environment. noise pollutionnoise pollution refers to the presence of excessive noise generated by human activities like road transport vehicles jet planes a busy market loudspeaker announcements etc. conclusionwhatever may be the type of pollution it always has a degrading effect on the environment and human health or else affects one or the other living species on earth. light pollution confuses roosting birds often causing fatal accidents. introductiontoday the very existence of human life on planet earth along with the life of other flora and fauna is threatened up to a large extent by the pollution. pollution affects everything essential for survival natural resources species health etc. what is pollutionwhen any external unwanted substance generated by a human activity enters into the environment it causes pollution. causes of pollution are always human induced and the natural cause of pollution is almost negligible. there are a number of human activities those cause pollution. tons of toxic waste generated as a byproduct in factories is left into the rivers and streams polluting them thousands of cubic meters of harmful gases are released by transportation vehicles polluting the air improperly disposed waste from urban settlements got strewn on land and water resulting in land as well as water pollution. now that we have got an idea on what is pollution we will move on to discussing some of the significant effects of pollution. effects of pollution on environmentpollution has a widespread effect on the environment as discussed below polluted airpollution contaminates the natural air making it harmful to breathe. for example toxic gases released by transportation vehicles mix with the air resulting in its pollution. when this air is inhaled by a human or animal it causes severe respiratory ailments. some species of animals and plants which are highly sensitive to such kind of pollution die. polluted water bodiesimproper disposal of waste generated by areas of human settlements cause this waste to reach our naturally occurring water bodies in form of runoff. the urban waste consists of several toxic compounds including plastic. this waste is non biodegradable and stays in water making it hazardous to consume. it also results in the depletion of aquatic species population which are highly sensitive to pollution. soil toxicitypollution cause due to agricultural activities like the use of chemical fertilizers result in toxicity of the soils. chemical fertilizers are made up of harmful chemical compounds which got mixed with the soil ultimately making it toxic. it affects the species of flora as well as fauna those depend on the purity of the soil for their survival. species depletionone of the most prominent effects of pollution on the environment is the depletion of species. when polluting substances get mixed with our natural resources it harms the living species in some way or the other. gaseous pollutants cause severe respiratory ailments and decrease the life expectancy of the fauna and flora as well. global warmingglobal warming is one of the main effects of pollution which leads to a number of environmental effects. gaseous pollutants like carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide released due to the burning of fossil fuels stays in the atmosphere resulting in greenhouse effect. green house effect on the other hand is responsible for a number of factors like unexpected climatic changes resulting in droughts famine etc depletion in aquatic species like coral reefs fishes etc. conclusionthe effect of pollution on the environment is far and wide. not only the pollution effects present but also threaten the future of several species if no concrete action to prevent pollution is taken. the rate at which the pollution is being damaged is way too more than it could be repaired. it might take centuries to reverse the damages that we have done to the environment that too it won t be an easy task and will require strict discipline and will to tackle pollution. introductionpollution refers to the presence of unwanted substances know as pollutants in the environment. pollution is an immediate threat to the environment and causes severe damage to it. lately the world is recognizing the need to deal with the pollution if the earth and its biodiversity are to be preserved. what is pollutionpollution occurs when an unwanted external compound mainly generated due to human activities enters into the environment. these compounds are referred to as the pollutants and cause severe damage to the environment. everything that constitutes the part of the environment that is the water bodies air flora and fauna are in some way or the other get affected by the pollution. moreover pollution also causes global effects like greenhouse gas effects global warming and acid rain. global warming refers to an increase in earth s average surface temperature and results in conditions like famine flood and drought. below we will discuss about the effects of pollution on major indian cities like delhi noida ghaziabad lucknow and varanasi. it must be known that an aqi between to is considered good to is considered as satisfactory to is considered as moderate to is considered as poor to is considered as very poor to is considered as severe and a value above is considered severe plus or emergency. pollution level in delhias per a survey done by the world health organization the national capital territory of delhi stands at the lowest position in terms of air quality index among other major cities around the world. in delhi children are the worst affected and as per a study nearly. million or of all children are suffering irreversible damages due to poor air quality. air quality index of delhi remains usually moderate during january to september months. however the aqi rapidly deteriorates during the onset of winter months from october to december. often during these months the aqi reaches to a hazardous level of plus. the particulate matter levels of pm. and pm particulate matters in delhi reach up the level of micrograms m. this is much above the safe limit which is mg m for pm. particles and mg m for pm particles. burning of the roots of paddy crop during the winter months in the adjoining states of punjab and haryana makes the situation worst in delhi by causing dense smoke. this method is traditionally called parali and is one of the prime constituents of pollution in delhi. pollution level in noidanoida also known as new okhla industrial development authority located in the western uttar pradesh bordering delhi is immediately behind the national capital in terms of poor air quality. incessant construction works in and around noida in addition to the heavy vehicular pollution and cold winter air causes a dense thick smog. the term smog is used for a mixture of smoke and fog suspended in the atmosphere. the air quality index of noida also gets very poor up to the level of during the winter months of october to december. the particulate matter level of this western up district is by and large at par with that of delhi often the two competing with each other for the highest concentration of particulate matters. pollution level in ghaziabadghaziabad often tops the list of north indian cities with worst air quality index and pollution. here also like delhi and noida the aqi goes past the hazardous level of plus mostly during the months of october to december. the main reason behind such a poor air quality index of ghaziabad is industrial pollution and waste burning. the city is flanked by the industries on the outskirts which results in a dense smoke emanating from the factories as well as from the transport vehicles plying to the industrial area. the pm level of ghaziabad reaches up to four times of permissible levels during october to december. sometimes this value is reached during the deepawali festival due to the incessant bursting of crackers and smoke emanated from them. pm particulate matter which has a permissible limit of microgram m often is recorded nearing around micrograms m in ghaziabad. pollution level in lucknowthe air quality index of the capital of uttar pradesh lucknow fluctuates between moderate and poor often crossing the plus mark. though the situation is definitely not as bad as delhi ncr nevertheless it still is alarming and requires concrete action. the worst air quality index of lucknow was recorded as in the first half of the november month. the quantity of suspended particulate matter has also increased significantly in lucknow s residential areas since the last decades. the air of lucknow is found to be consisting of very fine particulate matters pm. with concentration just below microgram m which is very highly hazardous indeed. pollution level in varanasithe ancient pilgrimage city of varanasi has always been in news for its everyday fluctuating population of tourists. being the parliamentary constituency of indian prime minister mr. narendra modi since it has become the centre of development with everyday construction works of some kind or the other. though the construction is good for the city s development point of view it is also causing some of the worst recorded downfalls in its air quality. aqi of varanasi in is ranked at the third position on the world health organization s list of fifteen most polluted cities in the world. the people of varanasi are facing respiratory ailments and other complications due to the ever continuing construction work. recorded air quality index of varanasi reaches up to which falls in the poor category. the level of particulate matter found in varanasi is pm. the value of which fluctuates within the range of microgram m to microgram m which is extremely unhealthy for sensitive groups and children. conclusionindia is home to some of the world s most polluted cities whose position remains almost uniform though sometimes shifting a place up or down. cities like delhi noida calcutta mumbai and varanasi all have obtained a position among the world s most polluted cities. there is an immediate need to tackle the situation with strong will and determination. it is the time when government people industries all should join hands to tackle the pollution and prevent the health and environmental hazards caused by it. more essays on pollution pollution essay air pollution water pollution soil pollution noise pollution land pollution thermal pollutionpollution slogans air pollution slogans water pollution slogans soil pollution slogans noise pollution slogansmore on plastic pollution essay on plastic bag essay on plastic pollution why plastic bags should be banned essay plastic pollution causes effects and solutions why plastic bags are harmful for health related information speech on pollutionparagraph on pollutionarticle on pollutionessay on swachh bharat abhiyanessay on environmentslogans on environmentessay on pollution due to urbanizationessay on pollution and its effectsessay on pollution due to festivalsessay on pollution due to firecrackersessay on environmental pollutionessay on vehicle pollutionshare rate an entrepreneur. masters in computer application and business administration. a passionate writer writing content for many years and regularly writing for indiacelebrating. com and other popular web portals. always believe in hard work where i am today is just because of hard work and passion to my work. i enjoy being busy all the time and respect a person who is disciplined and have respect for others. january june december april featuring of essayfind all please help us to improve contact us. copyright white planet technologies pvt. ltd. all rights reserved. by garima gunjan i have written an essay on pollution. here we get info on what is pollution and its types air water noise environment global warming and climate change. pollution is introducing something into the environment that is dirty unclean or has a harmful effect on the ecosystem. related essays in english pollution is a key issue that has been affecting our earth. although it is an issue that has been prevalent since ancient times in the century its harmful effect has been felt on a large scale. although the governments of different countries have taken several major steps to curb these effects there is still a long way to go. several natural processes and cycles get disturbed due to this. not only that many flora and fauna today either have gone extinct or are endangered. due to the rapid increase in the amount of pollution animals are losing their habitat at a rapid speed. pollution has affected several major cities across the globe. a majority of these polluted cities lie in india. some of the most polluted cities in the world are delhi kanpur bamenda moscow heze chernobyl beijing among others. although these cities have taken several steps to curb pollution they still have a long way to go. the air quality of these places is poor and there are cases of land and water pollution as well. now it s time that the administration of these cities prepares strategies to check these issues. related ten tips on writing a good essay basically there are four types of pollution let s discuss the types of pollution one by one india has seen an increase in the number of vehicles on its roads. these are responsible for transmitting harmful gases such as sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide. these gases are responsible for reducing the quantity of oxygen in the earth s atmosphere. they also cause several breathing problems respiratory diseases types of cancers etc. related essay on terrorism the shortage of potable water is a major repercussion of water pollution. people are forced to drink polluted water due to which they get diseases such as cholera diarrhea dysentery etc. this in turn results in the breeding of mosquitoes which is a cause of many diseases such as dengue. all these factors are responsible for making the soil toxic. apart from that noise from the bursting of crackers functioning of factories music played on loudspeakers especially during the festival season also contribute to noise pollution. if not controlled it can affect the functioning of the brain as well. often the day after the festival of diwali it is reported in the media how the bursting of crackers caused an increase in noise pollution in major cities of india. although these are the four major types of pollution lifestyle changes have caused several other types of pollution as well such as radioactive pollution light pollution among others. if a place ends up getting light in excess or in an unwanted amount then it contributes to light pollution. nowadays several urban areas are facing unwanted glares in excess amounts. this is due to the fact that most indian cities such as mumbai bangalore delhi chennai etc. have an active nightlife. we are living in the nuclear era. since a lot of countries are developing their own nuclear devices it has lead to an increase in the presence of radioactive substances in the atmosphere of the earth. this is known as radioactive pollution. handling and mining of radioactive substances testing minor accidents occurring in radioactive power plants are other major causes contributing to radioactive pollution. related essay on demonetization global warming is another name for climate change. the blanket of pollution that traps the heat around our planet is the main reason why global warming is increasing nowadays. as humans burn fossil fuels vehicles emit harmful gases jungles burn at alarming rates all these factors are the main reasons. once it enters the earth s atmosphere eventually spreading across the globe. as a result heat gets trapped around the earth for the next or years after it starts emitting again. the worst part is harmful gases such as carbon dioxide have increased at an alarming rate. due to this the upcoming generation will feel the effects of global warming for hundreds of years. related essay on global warming the authorities at the national and international levels have taken several steps to curb the pollution issue. some of these are as follows related essay on digital india in english under its banner the uno in had initiated united nations environment program in order to address the issue of pollution. it has issued several issues such as climate change ecosystem management environmental governance resource efficiency etc. it has lead to several successful treaties such as the montreal protocol to limit the emission of gases that were thinning the protective ozone layer minamata convention to limit the use of toxic mercury etc. unep sponsored solar loan programme where lakhs of people from different countries were provided with solar power panels. although the authorities of different cities are working hard to curb the pollution issue however it is the duty of citizens and common people also to contribute to this process. few of the important ways to curb all types of pollution are pollution is a problem that we need to solve at the earliest so that humans can live safely on this planet. it is important that we follow the suggested measures to curb this issue. its our responsibility to make our place a better place for living. in order to make the earth survive we have to stop polluting it. recommended read essay writing in englishessay writing in hinditips to score in english paperten tips on writing a good essaysimple tips and tricks to score well in examinationstips for developing confidencequick exam tips and trickstips and tricks career question and answerstips for success in your careerexam preparation tipsexam stress management tips for parentsanalytical paragraph writing format examples samplesreport writing format how to report writing examples topics samples and typesletter to editor class to topics sample and exampleinformal letter format topics examplesarticle writing format article writing topics and examplesclass writing skills classified advertisement writing examplesletter to editor class to topics sample and exampleleave application for marriage format sample and examplesstory writing for class to format topics examplesjob application with biodata format topics examplesleave application format for office school and sampleessay on the importance of computers in our lifeessay on importance of discipline for success in lifeessay on terrorismessay on skill india missionessay on renewable sources of energyessay on make in india projectessay on haritha haram programessay on corruptionten tips on writing a good essayessay on my aim in life to become an astronaut essay on the importance of educationessay on beti bachao beti padhaoessay on importance of sports and gamesessay on demonetizationessay on pollutionessay on water conservationessay on global warmingessay on diwali in englishessay on holi in englishessay on chandrayaan in englishessay on women empowerment in englishessay on child labour in englishessay on swachh bharat missioncontributions of drdo in indian defenceactive and passive voice definition rules exercise and example sentencescountable and uncountable nouns meaning definition difference and examplesdirect and indirect speech format rules exercise and examplesdeterminers definition types exercise and examplesall about tenses tenses examples types of tenses in english grammarenglish vocabulary for bank po exams synonyms mcq videosnoun definition types exercise with examples in hindi and englishwhat is a verb definition types of verbs exercise and verbs examples in hindi and englishwhat is a preposition definition types exercise and examples in hindi and englishmodals definition modals exercise list of modals with examplesclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questionsclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questions class english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english important questions class english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english lesson explanationclass english mcqsclass english lesson explanationclass lesson explanationall india entrance examsstate entrance examscommon entrance testupcoming entrance exams top entrance exams after entrance exams for jobs after graduationentrance exams for commerce studentsentrance exams after graduationlist of entrance exams for teaching jobsentrance exams for railways recruitmentlist of entrance exams after graduationlist of entrance exams conducted by iitstop mass communication entrance examslist of entrance exams for arts students after graduationentrance exam dates indian army entrance exams pollution comes from all types of sources with various consequences. pollution is harmful to the natural world and human health. if youre environmentally conscious understanding the pollution basics can help you to minimize your contribution to pollution. air pollution is any contamination of the atmosphere that disturbs the natural composition and chemistry of the air. this can be in the form of particulate matter such as dust or excessive gases like carbon dioxide or other vapors that cant be effectively removed through the natural cycles of the carbon cycle or the nitrogen cycle. some of the most excessive sources of air pollution include depending on the concentration of air pollutants several effects can be noticed. for example polluted air results in smog increase higher rain acidity crop depletion from inadequate oxygen and higher rates of asthma in the human population. some scientists believe that climate change is also related to increased air pollution. according to the world health organization each year million people worldwide die from air pollution. who states the annually death rate from ambient outdoor air pollution is. million people worldwide. the organizations statistics also reveal an annual death rate from exposure to household smoke from fuels and dirty cookstoves is. million people. of the worlds population who reports that live where air quality exceeds the limits of the who guidelines. water pollution means any contaminated water whether from chemical particulate or bacterial matter that degrades the waters quality and purity. water pollution can occur in oceans rivers lakes and underground reservoirs. the pollution spreads from different water sources flowing together through the natural water cycle. causes of water pollution include the effects of water pollution include decreasing the quantity of drinkable water available lowering water supplies for crop irrigation and impacting fish and wildlife populations that require water of a certain purity for survival. one of the worst water contaminants is untreated wastewater from municipalities and industries. this type of pollution leaches into the soil and water. the united nations educational scientific and cultural organization reports on municipal and industrial wastewater contamination to world water supplies in various countries. for example in europe of municipal and industrial wastewater is treated but in latin america counties that figure is only. middle east and north africa statistics fall around whereas asia and the pacific region is between and. untreated wastewater is simply released and pollutes land water coastal ecosystems. its estimated that water from u. s. major rivers is used and reused more than times before it finally reaches the ocean. nineteen percent of u. s. households are connected to septic tanks for treatment and disposal of wastewater. the un statistics revealed. of the u. s. population was connected to wastewater treatment. soil or land pollution is soil contamination that prevents the natural growth and balance of the land. pollution can be present in land used for cultivation habitation or as a wildlife preserve. some soil pollution is deliberate such as the creation of landfills. however much of soil land pollution is accidental and can have widespread effects. soil pollution sources include soil contamination can lead to poor growth and reduced crop yields. wildlife habitats can be destroyed. water and visual pollution are often the result of soil pollution. other results include soil erosion and desertification. according to the conservation institute soil pollution is attributed to deforestation and soil erosion agricultural chemicals industrialization mining landfills and human sewage. the loss of topsoil is attributed to fertilizers and the use of pesticides in farming practices. these chemicals create a breeding ground for harmful and devastating fungi that lead to land erosion. noise pollution refers to undesirable levels of noises caused by human activity that disrupt the standard of living in the affected area. noise pollution can come from some noise pollution may be temporary while other sources are more permanent. effects may include hearing loss wildlife disturbances and a general degradation of lifestyle. early childhood development and education can be impaired from noise. the who reports that studies and statistics on children exposed to chronic aircraft noise suffer from impaired cognitive performance well being and moderate evidence of blood pressure and catecholamine hormone secretions are effected. the who reports environmental noise and its effect on human health. in the eu road traffic noise exceeds db with of the eu population exposed. suffer from exposure to more than db levels. more than are exposed to nighttime noise levels of more than db. the acoustical society of america reports that in only to americans were exposed to noise created by vehicles. that percentage in was.. radioactive pollution is rare but extremely detrimental and even deadly when it occurs. because of its intensity and the difficulty of reversing damage there are strict government regulations to control radioactive pollution. sources of radioactive contamination include radiation pollution can cause birth defects cancer sterilization and other health problems for human and wildlife populations. it can also sterilize the soil and contribute to water and air pollution. according to the u. s. nuclear regulatory commission of radioactive pollution is the result of natural sources while comes from anthropogenic sources. thermal pollution is excess heat that creates undesirable effects over long periods of time. the earth has a natural thermal cycle but excessive temperature increases can be considered a rare type of pollution with long term effects. many types of thermal pollution are confined to areas near their source but multiple sources can have wider impacts over a greater geographic area. thermal pollution may be caused by when temperatures increase mild climatic changes may be observed. swift changes make wildlife populations vulnerable and they may be unable to recover. thermal pollution can be seen as a result of various manufacturers. for example illinois state water survey reports the highest heat emissions worldwide are found in the mississippi river generated by coal burning power plants. the most polluted basin in the world from thermal pollution is found in europe the rhine river. light pollution is the over illumination of an area that is considered obtrusive. light pollution isnt just found in cities. much of the modern world suffers from light pollution. sources include light pollution can interfere with the normal sleep cycle. if it is near residential areas light pollution can also degrade the quality of life for residents. light pollution makes it impossible to see stars therefore interfering with astronomical observation and personal enjoyment. the national institutes of health reveals a growing body of work that suggests light pollution may have long term ill effect on humans and wildlife. exposure to light photons that hit your retinas can disrupt the circadian rhythm of humans and animals. another effect of light pollution is the inability to see the night sky. this is troublesome to astronomers and anyone wishing to enjoy star gazing. in the new world atlas of artificial night sky brightness reported that of the world resides under light pollution. in fact of the populations of the united states and europe live under skies of light pollution. more than a third of the worlds population is unable to see the milky way. this breaks down to north americans and europeans never see the milky way. visual pollution is more than an aesthetic eyesore or undesirable unattractive views. it can lower the quality of life in certain areas and have an economic impact on property values as well as personal enjoyment. sources of visual pollution include while visual pollution has a few health or environmental effects is the pollution that can have detrimental affects. most of the effects impact those living near or in this type of pollution. visual pollution presents a hazard and alters the community identity. for example visual pollution can be distracting while driving a vehicle or operating equipment and can lead to traffic congestion. the european scientific journal published a study in june called visual pollution can have a deep degrading effect on urban and suburban community a study in few places of bengal india with special reference to unorganized billboards. the study concluded that developed countries recognized and were taking steps to reduce visual pollution. the researchers concluded that in developing countries garbage is a greater nuisance and health problem than it is a visual pollution issue. personal pollution is the contamination of ones body and lifestyle with detrimental actions. this may include according to the epa personal pollution includes all types of pharmaceuticals and personal care products. the human and veterinarian products create trace environmental pollutants found in both surface waters and ground waters. personal pollution gained its own category but no studies have been made directly assessing personal pollution. however there are studies on various types of personal pollution such as turf fertilizers found in epa reports on nutrient pollution another type of pollution not commonly reported. the epa reports nutrient pollution is a challenge since it is a big problem that is spread throughout the u. s. excessive phosphorous and nitrogen discharged into the water and air is largely blamed on personal pollution or human activities such as fertilizers sewage discharge from treatment plants animal manure runoff pet waste and more. row crop runoff and animal feeding operations are a major cause. intertwined with other forms of pollution such as its carriers of air and water and personal pollution nutrient pollution impacts all of these areas as well as human health. water charged with nutrient pollution can generate algae that overcomes the water systems. shellfish aquatic and marine life suffer when they absorb the toxins created by algae blooms. eating contaminated shellfish or drinking water from this source can make a person very ill and in extreme cases lead to death. the mississippi river basin runs through states before it empties into the gulf of mexico. nutrient pollution effects this ecosystem. the epa reports in the united states littering is a form of pollution that can fall into several other types of pollutions such as personal visual water and soil. any type of waste or trash carelessly discarded without proper disposal is the definition of littering. this can include anything from fast food containers bottles paper and plastic packaging sales receipts electronic waste etc. the type of litter often determines the effect it has on the environment. for example some litter contains harmful chemicals that can find their way into water and soil. plastics can harm wildlife that either get trapped in plastic bags and die or marine life that consumes small pieces of broken down plastic. the leading national nonprofit keep america beautiful reports statistics on the types of litter in the united states. these figures show less litter in residential neighborhoods than along the roads. when it comes to convenience stores and commercial areas the surrounding roadways have more litter. keep america beautiful report on percentages of roadside litter and sources all types of pollution are interconnected. for example light pollution requires energy to be made which means the electric plant needs to burn more fossil fuels to supply the electricity. those fossil fuels can contribute to air pollution which returns to the earth as acid rain and increases water pollution. the cycle of pollution can go on indefinitely but once you understand the different pollution types how they are created and the effects they can have you can make personal lifestyle changes to combat poor conditions for yourself and others around you. air purifiers and humidifiers have different functions. air purifiers are clean indoor air but do nothing for indoor humidity levels. they remove dust and smoke from the air as well as allergenic substances like animal dander and pollen. humidifiers add water into the air but do not clean it. air purifiers and humidifiers have different functions. air purifiers are clean indoor air but do nothing for indoor humidity levels. they remove dust and smoke from the air as well as allergenic substances like animal dander and pollen. humidifiers add water into the air but do not clean it. they are used to relieve health issues from dry air and help reduce static electricity in the home. air purifiers remove particles and other pollutants from indoor air. there are two main types of air purifiers those that use mechanical filters to separate out particulate matter and those that use electrostatic methods to trap electrically charged particles. ionizers which produce negative ions create a negative charge on suspended particles which then settle out of the air and stick to the next surface they contact where they can be wiped up. some air purifiers were found to produce ozone which is implicated in producing inflammation of the respiratory system and worsening asthma symptoms. ultraviolet or uv air purifiers kill bacteria and other pathogens and are commonly used in hospitals and day care centers. uv light purification has also become available in residential hvac unitsmechanical air purifiers use filters to remove relatively large airborne pollutants such as dust and pet dander from the air. filters are often made from foam pleated paper or polyester or some other synthetic material. a high efficiency particulate air filter commonly known as hepa is capable of removing. percent of airborne particles. hepa filters can remove extremely small particles but can not remove odors. an air purifier may combine a hepa filter with a charcoal filter to help reduce odors. humidifiers add water to indoor air increasing the relative humidity of the indoor environment. dry winter air can cause chapped skin and contribute to respiratory problems. adding moisture to the air with a humidifier can reduce dry skin and decrease breathing problems including lessening coughs. adding humidity to indoor air can also reduce static electricity and prevent wooden furniture from cracking. four main types of humidifiers are ultrasonic impeller driven evaporative and steam vaporizers. ultrasonic and impeller humidifiers both produce a cool mist. ultrasonic models are quiet because they use ultrasonic waves to produce mist while impeller models use a rotating disk that can produce noise. evaporative humidifiers use a fan to evaporate water into the air and are also cold humidifiers. steam vaporizers create a warm mist by heating water with an electrical element. some models allow the mist to cool slightly before exiting the machine and are known as warm mist humidifiers. the standing water in humidifiers can become home to a wide variety of bacteria mold and fungi. when the humidifier is turned on these organisms can be released into your home s air and breathing them can cause lung problems and even infections. in the past disinfectants used with humidifiers have also created problems. minerals from the humidifier s water tank can be released into the air where they settle out as a fine white dust. humidifiers that use heat to evaporate water are prone to mineral build up on the heating element and the filters in evaporative humidifiers can also harbor bacteria and molds. you must keep humidifiers clean and you need to occasionally descale them to remove mineral build up. reviewed by tom iarocci m. d. karen s. garvin has been a professional writer since when dragon magazine published her first article. her recent work includes encyclopedia entries on historical subjects. she holds a bachelor s degree in communications and is pursuing a masters degree in european history. her interests include photography science history and steampunk. pollution refers to the addition of contaminating substances to the natural environment resulting in an adverse impact on the environment. pollution is human made and the level of pollution of the environment has increased with the rise in human population and developments made by the human civilization. pollution can be of different types depending on the part of the environment that is getting polluted or the type of pollutants contaminants causing the pollution. air water and soil pollution are the major types of pollution. however given the wide range of ways in which our species have managed to contaminate the environment we also have noise light radioactive thermal and plastic pollution. the different types of pollution have been discussed in greater details below. air pollution refers to the release of pollutants like toxic gases biological molecules and particulate matter into the atmosphere. the pollutants can be derived from several sources including both natural processes and human activity. volcanic eruptions limnic eruptions automobile and industrial effluents etc. are some examples of air pollution sources. carbon monoxide carbon dioxide chlorofluorocarbons aerosol sprays etc. are some examples of air pollutants. such pollution can be highly detrimental to the health and well being of all life forms on earth. in simple terms the contamination of water bodies likes lakes rivers ponds aquifers etc. by pollutants is called water pollution. like air pollution water pollution is one of the most harmful types of pollution. it can have extremely disastrous consequences for all living beings using the contaminated water. a major volume of the all the pollutants produced on land end up in water bodies. toxic wastes released by industries pathogens released in sewage harmful chemicals present in agricultural runoffs etc. are some of the top water pollutants. the contamination of water can lead to epidemics and even pandemics that can wipe out the population of an entire species or even more than one species. thus water pollution has a highly adverse impact on the environment society and economy of a place. when the soil of an area is contaminated it leads to soil pollution or land degradation. the soil is essential to the growth of all plants including crops. thus a degradation in the soil quality translates to lower yields and poor health of crops grown on such soil. industrial and agricultural chemicals are the common pollutants contaminating the soil. when the environment is filled with unnecessary or unpleasant sounds that are harmful to animals and plants it is called noise pollution. transport vehicles machinery industries loud music people yelling etc. are some of the most common sources of noise pollution. this type of pollution on the long term can give rise to chronic diseases like cardiovascular diseases. the psychological health of people can also be affected by noise. as the name suggests plastic pollution is caused by plastic accumulation in the environment. plastic a non biodegradable substance is extremely harmful to all life on earth. every year thousands of animals lose their lives due to plastic pollution. ingestion of plastics or entanglement in plastic objects kill these animals. most of the plastic waste generated in the world end up in the oceans where they cause great harm to the marine ecosystem. when radioactive substances are present in areas where their presence is undesirable or unintended it results in a type of pollution called radioactive contamination. such substances are highly toxic to all life on earth. radioactive substances trigger mutations in the genetic material of living organisms leading to different types of cancers. exposure to such toxins can also adversely impact the different systems of the body. death or disfiguration are common effects of exposure to radioactive waste. irresponsible management of such wastes or radioactive disasters are the common causes of radioactive contamination. the pollution of the night environment by anthropogenic light is known as light pollution. this type of pollution is caused by an excessive lighting of the streets flood lights used in stadiums lights used in an industrial area etc. the negative effects of light pollution include the spoilage of the aesthetic environment of a place creating disturbances in the ecosystem and also harming the health of living creatures. an induced change in the temperature of large volumes of water causes thermal pollution. this type of pollution leads to the degradation of water quality as the warm water does not provide ideal living conditions for aquatic flora and fauna. for example when water used as a coolant in power plants or that used in industries is released into a natural water body the warm or hot water mixes with the rest of the water to raise the overall temperature of the aquatic ecosystem. higher temperatures also alter the composition of dissolved elements in water. the flora and fauna living in the area that was earlier adapted to a particular temperature range can be killed by this abrupt change in the water temperature. thus aquatic life experiences a thermal shock due to thermal pollution. everyone loves to see clean and green spaces and beautiful vistas. when human activity installs ugly barriers to this vision of open and clutter free landscapes it is called visual pollution. the installation of billboards open storage of trash networks of electric wires crisscrossing each other above the street etc. create visual pollution. this type of pollution generates distraction eye fatigues diversity in opinions and other psychological problems. when waste products generated by humans is not disposed of properly it is called littering. here waste can include anything that is discarded by humans after use like bottles glass packaging material electronic waste metal waste etc. some of these pollutants like electronics batteries tires etc. are hazardous to the health of the environment. when chemicals from such wastes leach into the soil or enter the water bodies they cause soil contamination and water pollution. finally these chemicals enter the bodies of organisms to cause disease and death. all maps graphics flags photos and original descriptions worldatlas. comenvironmental pollution is currently the biggest challenge facing the word today. in the united states of rivers and of lakes are too polluted for fishing swimming and aquatic life. not surprising though when. trillion gallons of untreated storm water industrial waste and untreated sewage are being discharge annually into american waters. one third of the topsoil in the world is already degraded and with the current rate of soil degradation caused be improper agricultural and industrial practices and deforestation most of the world s topsoil could be gone within the next years. the great smog in killed people in london. this event was caused by a period of cold weather combined with windless conditions that formed a dense layer of airborne pollutants mostly from coal plants over the city. there are many sources of pollution and each one has its own effect on the environment and living organisms. this article will discuss the causes and effects of the different kinds of pollution. there are many causes of pollution including chemical pollution into bodies of water and soil through improper disposal practices and agricultural activities and noise and light pollution created by cities and urbanization as a result of population growth. air and noise pollution can have adverse effects on animals plants and humans. although air and water pollution has been improving over the last few decades they are still a large topic in the discussion today. there are two types of air pollutants primary and secondary. primary pollutants are emitted directly from their source while secondary pollutants are formed when primary pollutants react in the atmosphere. the burning of fossil fuels for transportation and electricity produces both primary and secondary pollutants and is one of the biggest sources of air pollution. the fumes from car exhausts contain dangerous gases and particulates including hydrocarbons nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide. these gases rise into the atmosphere and react with other atmospheric gases creating even more toxic gases. according to the earth institute the heavy use of fertilizer for agriculture is a major contributor of fine particulate air pollution with most of europe russia china and the united states being affected. the level of pollution caused by agricultural activities is thought to outweigh all other sources of fine particulate air pollution in these countries. ammonia is the primary air pollutant that comes from agricultural activities. ammonia enters the air as a gas from concentrated livestock waste and fields that are over fertilized. this gaseous ammonia then combines with other pollutants such as nitrogen oxides and sulfates created by vehicles and industrial processes to create aerosols. aerosols are tiny particles that can penetrate deep into the lungs and cause heart and pulmonary disease. other agricultural air pollutants include pesticides herbicides and fungicides. all of which also contribute to water pollution. nutrient pollution is caused by wastewater sewage and fertilizers. the high levels of nutrients in these sources end up in bodies of water and promote algae and weed growth which can make the water undrinkable and depleted oxygen causing aquatic organisms to die. pesticides and herbicides applied to crops and residential areas concentrate in the soil and are carried to the groundwater by rainwater and runoff. for these reasons anytime someone drills a well for water it must be checked for pollutants. industrial waste is one of the main causes of water pollution by creating primary and secondary pollutants including sulphur lead and mercury nitrates and phosphates and oil spills. in developing countries around of their solid waste is dumped directly into the ocean or sea. this causes serious problems including the harming and killing of sea creatures which ultimately affects humans. land pollution is the destruction of land as a result of human s activities and the misuse of land resources. this occurs when humans apply chemicals such as pesticides and herbicides to the soil dispose of waste improperly and irresponsibly exploit minerals through mining. soil is also polluted through leaking underground septic tanks sewage systems the leaching of harmful substances from landfill and direct discharge of waste water by industrial plants into rivers and oceans. rain and flooding can bring pollutants from other already polluted lands to soil at other locations. over farming and over grazing by agricultural activities causes the soil to lose its nutrient value and structure causing soil degradation another type of soil pollution. landfills can leach harmful substances into the soil and water ways and create very bad smells and breeding grounds for rodents that transmit diseases. noise is considered an environmental pollutant caused by household sources social events commercial and industrial activities and transportation. light pollution is caused by the prolonged and excessive use of artificial lights at night that can cause health problems in humans and disrupt natural cycles including wildlife activities. sources of light pollution include electronic billboards night sports grounds street and car lights city parks public places airports and residential areas. pollution affects the earth s land air and water by releasing pollutants in the air water and land. pollution ends up in these forms including dust smog and toxic gas emissions. in addition to the natural sources of pollution they can also come from human activity. these sources include industries such as mining manufacturing plants power plants oil refineries and transportation that release pollutants into the air or water. high levels of air pollution can cause an increased risk of heart attack wheezing coughing and breathing problems and irritation of the eyes nose and throat. air pollution can also cause worsening of existing heart problems asthma and other lung complications. like humans animals can suffer from a number of health problems due to air pollution including birth defects reproductive failure and diseases. air pollution causes a number of environmental effects in addition to the effects on humans and animals. acid rain contains high levels of nitric and sulfuric acids that are created by oxides and sulfur oxides released into the air by the burning of fossil fuels. acid rain damages trees and acidifies soils and water bodies making the water too acidic for fish and other aquatic life. nitrogen oxides released into the air by the burning of fossil fuels also contribute to the nitrogen responsible for toxic algae blooms. the release of man made compounds including hydrochlorofluorocarbons chlorofluorocarbons and halons formerly used as coolants foaming agents pesticides solvents aerosol propellants and fire extinguishers are depleting the ozone. the ozone layer in the stratosphere forms a protective layer that reflects harmful ultraviolet rays back into space that would otherwise destroy animal and plant life. water pollution is a serious threat to humans animals and aquatic life. the effects of water pollution depend on which chemicals are being dumped where. bodies of water that are near urbanized areas tend to be heavily polluted by dumbing of garbage and chemicals both legally and illegally by industrial plants health centers and individuals. by far the biggest consequence of water pollution is the death of aquatic creatures which can disrupt the entire food chain. pollutants such as cadmium mercury and lead are eaten by tiny aquatic organisms that are then eaten by fish and shell fish becoming more concentrated with each step up the food chain and causing serious problems in humans and wildlife. nutrient pollution can cause toxic algal blooms in drinking water sources that create toxins that kill fish and other aquatic animals. direct exposure to this toxic alga causes serious health problems in humans including neurological effects respiratory problems stomach and liver illness and rashes. a consequential problem is created when disinfectants used to treat drinking water reach water polluted with toxic algae they react creating dioxins. dioxins are extremely harmful chemical compounds that have been linked with reproductive and development problems and even cancer. nitrates caused by fertilizers also contaminate drinking water and according to the environmental protection agency babies who consume water that is high in nitrates can become seriously ill with blue baby syndrome which causes shortness of breath and blue tinted skin and can lead to death if not treated early. land and soil pollution has substantial consequences for humans animals microorganisms and aquatic life. contaminated land and soil can cause various problems on the skin respiratory problems and even different kinds of cancers. these toxic substances come into contact with the human body directly through eating fruits and vegetables that have been grown in polluted soils being consumed through drinking water that has been contaminated direct contact with the skin and breathing in air polluted with particles and dust. deforestation is the biggest concern when it comes to land degradation and soil erosion. clear cutting of vegetation and tree cover creates harsh conditions that destroy ecosystems and habitats. deforestation also creates an imbalance in atmospheric conditions reducing the amount of carbon that is naturally taken out of the atmosphere. this is a serious problem considering that most pollution created by people is carbon based. noise pollution can cause stress anxiety headaches irritability hearing loss and sleep loss resulting in decreased productivity. oil drills submarines and other vessels on and in the ocean can cause excessive noise that has resulted in the injury or death of marine animals especially whales. too much light causes eye strain and stress harming our eyes and decreasing our quality of life. light pollution also causes a decrease in the hormone melatonin that helps us to fall asleep resulting in restlessness and fatigue. many mammals insects birds and reptiles are photoperiodic meaning their movement mating growth and development and eating cycles are regulated by natural light patterns. light pollution can interfere with these natural behaviors and cycles causing a decrease in wildlife populations. pollution needs to be dramatically reduced because it is destroying the environment we live in contaminating our food and water causing diseases and cancers in humans and wildlife and destroying the air we breathe and the atmosphere that protects us from harmful ultra violet radiation. it is the responsibility of every living person to protect the environment and with the population ever increasing pollution problems are only going to get worse unless we do something about it. protecting the environment is a long and daunting task requiring continuous planning governmental policies and public and industrial participation. however the result of ignoring the problem will be catastrophic and life as we know it will begin to end. by decreasing waste implementing recycling policies banning dangerous agricultural chemicals and developing safe renewable energy we can significantly reduce the amount of pollution going into the environment annually and increase our quality of living. everyone is entitled to clean air to breathe water to drink and public lands to enjoy. if you have any ideas on how to reduce pollution please drop a comment and share your thoughts. recent postsecavo. com participates in the amazon services llc associates program. from time to time we may recommend a product for you to purchase for a specific purpose and will often link to amazon s website for you to easily complete that purchase. if you buy a product at amazon after clicking one of our links we may earn a commission. water bodies e. g. lake river ocean and ground water get contaminated due to discharge of pollutants in the water bodies without any treatment to remove harmful compounds. water pollution adversely affects not only aquatic plants and animals but it also affects human beings and ecosystems. water pollution is caused due to several reasons. here are the few major causes of water pollution sewage and waste water sewage garbage and liquid waste of households agricultural lands and factories are discharged into lakes and rivers. these wastes contain harmful chemicals and toxins which make the water poisonous for aquatic animals and plants. dumping dumping of solid wastes and litters in water bodies causes huge problems. litters include glass plastic aluminum styrofoam etc. different things take different amount of time to degrade in water. they affect aquatic plants and animals. industrial waste industrial waste contains pollutants like asbestos lead mercury and petrochemicals which are extremely harmful to both people and environment. industrial waste is discharged into lakes and rivers by using fresh water making the water contaminated. oil pollution sea water gets polluted due to oil spilled from ships and tankers while traveling. the spilled oil does not dissolve in water and forms a thick sludge polluting the water. acid rain acid rain is pollution of water caused by air pollution. when the acidic particles caused by air pollution in the atmosphere mix with water vapor it results in acid rain. global warming due to global warming there is an increase in water temperature. this increase in temperature results in death of aquatic plants and animals. this also results in bleaching of coral reefs in water. eutrophication eutrophication is an increased level of nutrients in water bodies. this results in bloom of algae in water. it also depletes the oxygen in water which negatively affects fish and other aquatic animal population. it is very important to prevent the polluting of water bodies and remove existing contaminants or reducing the concentration of these contaminants so as to make it fit for desired use. following are some of the ways of treating polluted water industrial treatment the raw sewage is needed to be treated correctly in a water treatment plant before it can be safely released into the environment. to reduce the amount and toxicity of waste it is passed through a number of chambers and chemical processes in water treatment plant. denitrification conversion of nitrates in gas is called denitrification. it is an ecological approach to prevent leaching of nitrates in soil. it stops ground water from getting contaminated. ozone waste water treatment ozone waste water treatment method is becoming very popular. in this method the pollutants in water are broken down by an ozone generator. ozone oxidizes bacteria molds organic material and other pollutants in water. septic tanks septic tanks are used to treat sewage at the place of location instead of treating it in any plant or sewage system. this system is used at the individual building level. the sewage is separated into solid and liquid components and treated separately. it s an old adage no water no life. we don t give much thought about using water cautiously even though it is the basis of our daily life. with the increasing scarcity of water everywhere it has become imperative to use water judiciously and conserve it as much as we can. with the lockdown being enforced about go in hyderabad the go is a government order that was issued in that followed the precautionary principle in order to protect the reservoirs mainly the drinking water requirement of hyderabad. the saddest part of the go is despite the protection of these lakes by the government the rapid urbanization and selfish attitude the nagpur municipal corporation is possible to make rainwater harvesting compulsory for all buildings occupied and driven by institutions. it is the first of its kind move proposed by the rainwater harvesting committee. a couple of days ago the committee carried a meeting at the nmc head office which was organized by mayor sandip while oil is one of the prime movers of the world economy the scarcity of water is likely to be one of the biggest challenges in the coming years. a large number of people including those in developing nations still do not have access to safe drinking water. the scarcity of pure drinking water is your details has been submitted successfully. the information provided herein have been collected from publicly available sources and is yet to be verified as per rera guidelines. read more.. the information sources used here include onsite interviews marketing material and other information sources on the internet. the information related to ownership of this property are also based on material gathered from public sources mentioned above or as has been declared to us by the owners person listing the property. these data have not yet been verified against authentic documents and are only indicative of the actual situation of this property project or land holding and their ownership. at commonfloor we provide this information to help our users find publicly available data in a structured format. we are in the process of connecting with the relevant owners and verifying the data as per the provisions of the real estate act. we will keep updating the information here regularly. while we believe that the information provided to you is correct on the basis of the data provided to us please consider this data and information as indicative and use your judgement and verify any information before making any decision. copyright commonfloor. com. all rights reserved. jump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. istockair pollution refers to the release of pollutants into the airpollutants which are detrimental to human health and the planet as a whole. according to the world health organization each year air pollution is responsible for nearly seven million deaths around the globe. nine out of ten human beings currently breathe air that exceeds the who s guideline limits for pollutants with those living in low and middle income countries suffering the most. in the united states the clean air act established in authorizes the u. s. environmental protection agency to safeguard public health by regulating the emissions of these harmful air pollutants. most air pollution comes from energy use and production says john walke director of the clean air project part of the climate and clean energy program at nrdc. burning fossil fuels releases gases and chemicals into the air. and in an especially destructive feedback loop air pollution not only contributes to climate change but is also exacerbated by it. air pollution in the form of carbon dioxide and methane raises the earth s temperature walke says. another type of air pollution smog is then worsened by that increased heat forming when the weather is warmer and there s more ultraviolet radiation. climate change also increases the production of allergenic air pollutants including mold and pollen. we ve made progress over the last years improving air quality in the united states thanks to the clean air act says kim knowlton senior scientist and deputy director of the nrdc science center. but climate change will make it harder in the future to meet pollution standards which are designed to protect health. the effects of air pollution on the human body vary depending on the type of pollutant and the length and level of exposureas well as other factors including a person s individual health risks and the cumulative impacts of multiple pollutants or stressors. these are the two most prevalent types of air pollution. smog occurs when emissions from combusting fossil fuels react with sunlight. soot is made up of tiny particles of chemicals soil smoke dust or allergensin the form of either gas or solidsthat are carried in the air. the sources of smog and soot are similar. both come from cars and trucks factories power plants incinerators engines generally anything that combusts fossil fuels such as coal gas or natural gas walke says. smog can irritate the eyes and throat and also damage the lungs especially those of children senior citizens and people who work or exercise outdoors. it s even worse for people who have asthma or allergies these extra pollutants can intensify their symptoms and trigger asthma attacks. the tiniest airborne particles in soot whether gaseous or solid are especially dangerous because they can penetrate the lungs and bloodstream and worsen bronchitis lead to heart attacks and even hasten death. in a report from harvard s t. h. chan school of public health showed covid mortality rates in areas with more soot pollution were higher than in areas with even slightly less showing a correlation between the virus s deadliness and long term exposure to fine particulate matter and illuminating an environmental justice issue. because highways and polluting facilities have historically been sited in or next to low income neighborhoods and communities of color the negative effects of this pollution have been disproportionately experienced by the people who live in these communities. in the union of concerned scientists found that soot exposure was percent higher for asian americans on average than for other americans. for black people the exposure rate was percent higher for latinos percent higher. a number of air pollutants pose severe health risks and can sometimes be fatal even in small amounts. almost of them are regulated by law some of the most common are mercury lead dioxins and benzene. these are also most often emitted during gas or coal combustion incinerating orin the case of benzenefound in gasoline walke says. benzene classified as a carcinogen by the epa can cause eye skin and lung irritation in the short term and blood disorders in the long term. dioxins more typically found in food but also present in small amounts in the air can affect the liver in the short term and harm the immune nervous and endocrine systems as well as reproductive functions. mercury attacks the central nervous system. in large amounts lead can damage children s brains and kidneys and even minimal exposure can affect children s iq and ability to learn. another category of toxic compounds polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are by products of traffic exhaust and wildfire smoke. in large amounts they have been linked to eye and lung irritation blood and liver issues and even cancer. in one study the children of mothers exposed to pahs during pregnancy showed slower brain processing speeds and more pronounced symptoms of adhd. by trapping the earth s heat in the atmosphere greenhouse gases lead to warmer temperatures which in turn lead to the hallmarks of climate change rising sea levels more extreme weather heat related deaths and the increased transmission of infectious diseases. in carbon dioxide accounted for percent of the country s total greenhouse gas emissions and methane made up percent. carbon dioxide comes from combusting fossil fuels and methane comes from natural and industrial sources including large amounts that are released during oil and gas drilling walke says. we emit far larger amounts of carbon dioxide but methane is significantly more potent so it s also very destructive. another class of greenhouse gases hydrofluorocarbons are thousands of times more powerful than carbon dioxide in their ability to trap heat. in october more than countries reached an agreement to reduce the use of these chemicalswhich are found in air conditioners and refrigeratorsand develop greener alternatives over time. though president trump was unwilling to sign on to this agreement a bipartisan group of senators overrode his objections in and set the united states on track to slash hfcs by percent by. according to david doniger senior strategic director of nrdc s climate and clean energy program the agreed to hfc phasedown will avoid the equivalent of more than billion tons of carbon dioxide over the next years. mold and allergens from trees weeds and grass are also carried in the air are exacerbated by climate change and can be hazardous to health. though they aren t regulated and are less directly connected to human actions they can be considered a form of air pollution. when homes schools or businesses get water damage mold can grow and can produce allergenic airborne pollutants knowlton says. mold exposure can precipitate asthma attacks or an allergic response and some molds can even produce toxins that would be dangerous for anyone to inhale. pollen allergies are worsening because of climate change. lab and field studies are showing that pollen producing plantsespecially ragweedgrow larger and produce more pollen when you increase the amount of carbon dioxide that they grow in knowlton says. climate change also extends the pollen production season and some studies are beginning to suggest that ragweed pollen itself might be becoming a more potent allergen. if so more people will suffer runny noses fevers itchy eyes and other symptoms. air pollution is now the world s fourth largest risk factor for early death. according to the most recent state of global air reportwhich summarizes the latest scientific understanding of air pollution around the world. million deaths were linked to outdoor air pollution exposures in and another. million deaths were caused by indoor air pollution. despite improvements in reducing global average mortality rates from air pollution the world s most populous countries india and china continue to bear the highest burdens of disease says vijay lamaye staff scientist at the nrdc science center. this report is a sobering reminder that the climate crisis threatens to worsen air pollution problems significantly if we fail to act to cut carbon pollution. a post shared by nrdc some four out of ten u. s. residents million peoplelive in counties with unhealthy levels of air pollution according to the state of the air report by the american lung association. since the annual report was first published in its findings have shown how the clean air act has been able to reduce harmful emissions from transportation power plants and manufacturing. recent findings however reflect how climate changefueled wildfires and extreme heat are adding to the challenges of protecting public health. the latest reportwhich focuses on ozone year round particle pollution and short term particle pollutionalso finds that people of color are percent more likely than white people to live in a county with a failing grade in at least one of those categories and three times more likely to live in a county that fails in all three. in rankings for each of the three pollution categories covered by the ala report california cities occupy the top three slots despite significant gains the golden state has made in the past half century. at the other end of the spectrum burlington vermont honolulu and wilmington north carolina consistently rank among the country s best cities for air quality. no one wants to live next door to an incinerator oil refinery port toxic waste dump or other polluting site. yet millions of people around the world do and this puts them at a much higher risk for respiratory disease cardiovascular disease neurological damage cancer and death. in the united states people of color are. times more likely than whites to live in areas with poor air quality according to the ala. historically racist zoning policies and the discriminatory lending practices known as redlining have combined to keep polluting industries and car choked highways away from white neighborhoods and have turned communities of colorespecially poor and working class communities of colorinto sacrifice zones where residents are forced to breathe dirty air and suffer the many health problems associated with it. in addition to the increased health risks that come from living in such places members of these communities experience economic harm in the form of missed workdays higher medical costs and local underinvestment. environmental racism isnt limited to cities and industrial areas. outdoor laborers including the estimated three million migrant and seasonal farmworkers in the united states are among the most vulnerable to air pollutionand also among the least equipped politically to pressure employers and lawmakers to affirm their right to breathe clean air. recently cumulative impact mapping which uses data on environmental conditions and demographics has been able to show how some communities are overburdened with layers of issues like high levels of poverty unemployment and pollution. tools like the environmental justice screening method and the epa s ejscreen provide evidence of what many environmental justice communities have been explaining for decades that we need land use and public health reforms to ensure that vulnerable areas are not overburdened and that the people who need resources most are receiving them. in the united states the clean air act has been a crucial tool for reducing air pollution since its passage in although fossil fuel interests aided by industry friendly lawmakers have frequently attempted to weaken its many protections. ensuring that this bedrock environmental law remains intact and properly enforced will always be key to maintaining and improving our air quality. but the best most effective way to control air pollution is to speed up our transition to cleaner fuels and industrial processes. by switching over to renewable energy sources maximizing fuel efficiency in our vehicles and replacing more and more of our gasoline powered cars and trucks with electric versions well be limiting air pollution at its source while also curbing the global warming that heightens so many of its worst health impacts. and what about the economic costs of controlling air pollution according to a report on the clean air act commissioned by nrdc the annual benefits of cleaner air are up to times greater than the cost of clean air regulations. those benefits include up to avoided premature deaths fewer hospital admissions for cardiac and respiratory illnesses and net economic benefits of up to. trillion for the u. s. economy every year. the less gasoline we burn the better we re doing to reduce air pollution and harmful effects of climate change walke says. make good choices about transportation. when you can walk ride a bike or take public transportation. for driving choose a car that gets better miles per gallon of gas or choose an electric car. you can also investigate your power provider optionsyou may be able to request that your electricity be supplied by wind or solar. buying your food locally cuts down on the fossil fuels burned in trucking or flying food in from across the country. and most important support leaders who push for clean air and water and responsible steps on climate change walke says. this story was originally published on november and has been updated with new information and links. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. to a college student who grew up surrounded by heavy truck traffic warehouses and commercial hubs in one of california s most polluted communities the push to electrify transportation is more than just urgent health policyit s personal. the global toll of premature deaths attributed to the burning of coal gasoline and diesel is breathtakingly high with new research doubling previous estimates. a new study shows that most of us humans are likely inhaling more air pollution each year. for years the clean air act has proved that health and prosperity go hand in hand. the landmark law is now under threat. david doniger senior strategic director of the climate clean energy program has helped shape federal and global climate related policies since he joined nrdc in. the trump administration failed to monitor air pollution in the toxic aftermath of hurricane harvey. also trump is taking a chainsaw to our protections and the epa can t count to. plus the solar industry pleads for mercy and the president says he thinks about climate change all the time. hmm. as greenhouse gasses fill the sky a progressive governor and worried residents take on oil and gasthe state s most powerful industry. also the self styled environmentalist in chief skips a climate summit and the epa s science advisory board misses a big big deadline. plus national parks are getting hazy and trump makes a quixotic bid to buy greenland. trump also kills years of child health research and continues to neglect chemical safety. the tireless efforts of locals are reshaping one of new jersey s most polluted areas. the air in southwestern indiana is bad enough without the emissions from yet another proposed polluter. ten years after the disaster at a tennessee power plant the cleanup crew is seeking justice. at the same time the trump administration is weakening protections for this toxic pollution. interior s bernhardt helped bury a damning pesticide report the clean air committee goes soft on soot and trump nominates a climate change denier to the fed board. trump s wildfire lies zinke s acronym defense and the epa s forced altruism involving truck pollution. everything you wanted to know about our changing climate but were too afraid to ask. so take it somewhere else says chicago s southeast side. residents who live near the country s busiest ports are getting a new lens on the pollution in their backyards and new tactics to help fight it. nrdc s gina ramirez is helping to bring attention to the wafts of manganese dust that plague her family and neighbors on chicago s southeast side. short answer yes. even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet. trump won t sign the g climate commitment pruitt doesn t have time for smog limits and zinke cancels science. as temperatures and carbon levels rise even breathing has become a challenge. here s what you can do to help clear the air. trump rolls back fuel efficiency standards while his epa chief celebrates the country s clean air. scientist kim knowlton monitors the inextricable connections between the planets fragile health and our own. since this giant salty lake in the desert lost its water supply its bird habitat has been shrinking and more toxic dust is wafting up from its dry lake bed. can the salton sea be saved considering making the switch heres everything you need to know about driving electric cars and hybrids. the new proposal would take us backward on climate tilt the grid toward coal and actually kill people. every time you go outside you may be inhaling harmful chemicals. but dont hold your breath. just use your head. so many technological innovations in the automobile industry stem directly from guidelines intended to reduce gas guzzling. if we lose these guidelines we ll also lose a lot of our workforce. roadside plants helped officials trace the source of a public health crisis and led to new standards for clean air in oregon. southeast side residents have been plagued by a heavy metal that s known to negatively impact the brain function of children. a step by step guide to protecting your community from dirty development projects. plus your one and only chance to save the clean power plan and steve bannon s role in the paris climate withdrawal. sometimes the best way to turn your anger into action is to pick up the phone. follow these tips to minimize your anxiety and maximize your impact. the epa lets states pollute other states air the atlantic coast pipeline fails and fails again to follow the law and ryan zinke actually says the government works for oil companies. but plans to cut local carbon pollution might help this asthma capital shake its wheezy reputation. a recent study found that the state is home to four of the country s most polluting power plants. but elected officials won t even show up to hear their constituents concerns about it. oil trains won t get better brakes air conditioners won t get safer chemicals and children lose their epa advocate. when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosureshelp save naturein this article we discuss the major causes of pollution in a bid to understand how we are contributing to environmental degradation directly or indirectly. in this article we discuss the major causes of pollution in a bid to understand how we are contributing to environmental degradation directly or indirectly. a study conducted in revealed that percent of deaths in the world are directly or indirectly related to air water and land pollution. basically environmental pollution is a phenomenon wherein certain pollutants are introduced in the environment either knowingly or unknowingly. this in turn hampers the balance of the ecosystem and triggers various environmental issues. the severity of pollution depends on chemical nature and concentration of these pollutants in the environment. there are different types of pollution the major ones being air pollution water pollution and land pollution. irrespective of which part of the world we are talking about each of these three types have different causes and therefore they have to be discussed individually. while pollution is caused by natural as well as man made sources it is the man made pollution which is adding to the severity of this issue and threatening the existence of life on the planet. to a large extent environmental pollution can be attributed to various human activities such as transportation industrial production construction mining agriculture etc. these activities which are technically referred to as the anthropogenic causes of pollution have been polluting the environment since ages. however the rate at which pollution is happening today we are left with no option but to take a serious note of it. air pollution is one of the major environmental problems in the world. the united states which constitutes for approximately percent of the world population alone produces percent of the total carbon dioxide in the world. among the leading causes of air pollution human transportation is by far the most prominent. millions of vehicles dump tons of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere every single day. other than these vehicles industrial plants which release various harmful gases by burning fossil fuels have a major share in polluting the air. it may come as a surprise for many but agricultural activities such as clearance of land for agriculture and use of pesticides also contribute to this form of pollution to a significant extent. water pollution is a broad concept which encompasses the pollution of inland water sources as well as ocean bodies on the planet. while inland water sources have been turned into virtual dumping sites owing to industrial pollution ocean bodies bear the brunt of marine transportation and oil spills. the amount of sewage waste generated by a single household may not seem much but if we take into consideration the fact that there are millions of households things become serious. a significant proportion of waste produced in these homes is directed to water sources without being subjected to proper treatment. other than sewage fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture also contaminate water. they make their way to water sources through surface runoff during precipitation. as for ocean pollution causes oil spills have a major role to play. the rising number of oil spills over the last few years is in fact a serious concern. land pollution also known as soil pollution is actually the process wherein soil is contaminated due to the introduction of some harmful chemical substances in it. among the various human activities which contribute to land pollution agriculture and mining are perhaps the most prominent ones. when it comes to soil pollution the list of contaminants includes chlorinated hydrocarbons chromium cadmium lead zinc etc. other than the practice of agriculture and mining dumping of industrial and domestic waste in the soil also pollutes it. the harmful chemicals which are suspended in the air get dissolved in rainwater and pollute the soil when they come to the earth s surface in the form of acid rain. similarly surface runoff transports contaminants from one place to another and adds to land pollution. owing to the interrelationship between these forms of pollution one can t afford to ignore their causes and effects. while many people are of the opinion that pollution is only caused due to chemical substances the fact is that even energy in excess can cause pollution. noise pollution and thermal pollution are the best examples of the same. if you are still not able to understand the seriousness of the issue maybe a closer look at its harmful effects will come as an eye opener for you. like it share it uncategorized our site includes quite a bit of content so if youre having an issue finding what youre looking for go on ahead and use that search feature there copyright help save nature buzzle. com inc. quail hill pkwy suite irvine ca there are many sources of pollution. anything which disturbs natural environment can cause pollution. much of pollution is caused by human activities although there are natural causes such as forest fires. humans are currently the main contributor to pollution of our planet. for example industrial waste in water bodies damages and disturbs the water life. excess noise from automobiles cities and airplanes causes noise pollution. to learn more about the causes of air pollution specifically see this answer. to learn more about the causes of water pollution specifically see this answer. to learn more about the causes of land pollution specifically see this answer. see below... pollution is harmful material released into the environment. one result of air pollution is acid rain. this occurs when exhaust from industries mixes with moisture in the air. this precipitation then falls as acid rain. it has damaged historic buildings bridges cathedrals and monuments across western europe. over the years acid rain has also damaged forests and freshwater lakes. categoriesair pollution is the presence of substances in the atmosphere that are harmful to the health of humans and other living beings or cause damage to the climate or to materials. there are many different types of air pollutants such as gases particulates and biological molecules. air pollution may cause diseases allergies and even death to humans it may also cause harm to other living organisms such as animals and food crops and may damage the natural environment or built environment. both human activity and natural processes can generate air pollution. air pollution is a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related diseases including respiratory infections heart disease copd stroke and lung cancer. growing evidence suggests that air pollution exposure may be associated with reduced iq scores impaired cognition increased risk for psychiatric disorders such as depression and detrimental perinatal health. the human health effects of poor air quality are far reaching but principally affect the bodys respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. individual reactions to air pollutants depend on the type of pollutant a person is exposed to the degree of exposure and the individuals health status and genetics. outdoor air pollution alone causes. to. million deaths annually making it one of the top contributors to human death. overall air pollution causes the deaths of around million people worldwide each year and is the worlds largest single environmental health risk. indoor air pollution and poor urban air quality are listed as two of the worlds worst toxic pollution problems in the blacksmith institute worlds worst polluted places report. the scope of the air pollution crisis is enormous of the worlds population breathes dirty air to some degree. although the health consequences are extensive the way the problem is handled is often haphazard. productivity losses and degraded quality of life caused by air pollution are estimated to cost the world economy trillion per year but along with health and mortality impacts are an externality to the contemporary economic system and most human activity albeit sometimes being moderately regulated and monitored. various pollution control technologies and strategies are available to reduce air pollution. to reduce the impacts of air pollution both international and national legislation and regulation have been implemented to regulate air pollution. local laws where well enforced have led to strong public health improvements. at the international level some of these efforts have been successful for example the montreal protocol was successful at reducing release of harmful ozone depleting chemicals or the helsinki protocol which reduced sulfur emissions while other attempts have so far been less successful in implementation such as international action on climate change. an air pollutant is a material in the air that can have adverse effects on humans and the ecosystem. the substance can be solid particles liquid droplets or gases. a pollutant can be of natural origin or man made. pollutants are classified as primary or secondary. primary pollutants are usually produced by processes such as ash from a volcanic eruption. other examples include carbon monoxide gas from motor vehicle exhausts or sulfur dioxide released from factories. secondary pollutants are not emitted directly. rather they form in the air when primary pollutants react or interact. ground level ozone is a prominent example of a secondary pollutant. some pollutants may be both primary and secondary they are both emitted directly and formed from other primary pollutants. pollutants emitted into the atmosphere by human activity include secondary pollutants include minor air pollutants include persistent organic pollutants are organic compounds that are resistant to environmental degradation through chemical biological and photolytic processes. because of this they have been observed to persist in the environment to be capable of long range transport bioaccumulate in human and animal tissue biomagnify in food chains and to have potentially significant impacts on human health and the environment. these are mostly related to the burning of fuel. there are also sources from processes other than combustion air pollutant emission factors are reported representative values that attempt to relate the quantity of a pollutant released to the ambient air with an activity associated with the release of that pollutant. these factors are usually expressed as the weight of pollutant divided by a unit weight volume distance or duration of the activity emitting the pollutant. such factors facilitate estimation of emissions from various sources of air pollution. in most cases these factors are simply averages of all available data of acceptable quality and are generally assumed to be representative of long term averages. there are compounds in the list of persistent organic pollutants. dioxins and furans are two of them and intentionally created by combustion of organics like open burning of plastics. these compounds are also endocrine disruptors and can mutate the human genes. the united states environmental protection agency has published a compilation of air pollutant emission factors for a wide range of industrial sources. the united kingdom australia canada and many other countries have published similar compilations as well as the european environment agency. air pollution risk is a function of the hazard of the pollutant and the exposure to that pollutant. air pollution exposure can be expressed for an individual for certain groups or for entire populations. for example one may want to calculate the exposure to a hazardous air pollutant for a geographic area which includes the various microenvironments and age groups. this can be calculated as an inhalation exposure. this would account for daily exposure in various settings. the exposure needs to include different age and other demographic groups especially infants children pregnant women and other sensitive subpopulations. the exposure to an air pollutant must integrate the concentrations of the air pollutant with respect to the time spent in each setting and the respective inhalation rates for each subgroup for each specific time that the subgroup is in the setting and engaged in particular activities. for example a small childs inhalation rate will be less than that of an adult. a child engaged in vigorous exercise will have a higher respiration rate than the same child in a sedentary activity. the daily exposure then needs to reflect the time spent in each micro environmental setting and the type of activities in these settings. the air pollutant concentration in each microactivity microenvironmental setting is summed to indicate the exposure. for some pollutants such as black carbon traffic related exposures may dominate total exposure despite short exposure times since high concentrations coincide with proximity to major roads or participation to traffic. a large portion of total daily exposure occurs as short peaks of high concentrations but it remains unclear how to define peaks and determine their frequency and health impact. in the who halved its recommended guideline limit for tiny particles from burning fossil fuels. the new limit for nitrogen dioxide is lower. a lack of ventilation indoors concentrates air pollution where people often spend the majority of their time. radon gas a carcinogen is exuded from the earth in certain locations and trapped inside houses. building materials including carpeting and plywood emit formaldehyde gas. paint and solvents give off volatile organic compounds as they dry. lead paint can degenerate into dust and be inhaled. intentional air pollution is introduced with the use of air fresheners incense and other scented items. controlled wood fires in cook stoves and fireplaces can add significant amounts of harmful smoke particulates into the air inside and out. indoor pollution fatalities may be caused by using pesticides and other chemical sprays indoors without proper ventilation. carbon monoxide poisoning and fatalities are often caused by faulty vents and chimneys or by the burning of charcoal indoors or in a confined space such as a tent. chronic carbon monoxide poisoning can result even from poorly adjusted pilot lights. traps are built into all domestic plumbing to keep sewer gas and hydrogen sulfide out of interiors. clothing emits tetrachloroethylene or other dry cleaning fluids for days after dry cleaning. though its use has now been banned in many countries the extensive use of asbestos in industrial and domestic environments in the past has left a potentially very dangerous material in many localities. asbestosis is a chronic inflammatory medical condition affecting the tissue of the lungs. it occurs after long term heavy exposure to asbestos from asbestos containing materials in structures. sufferers have severe dyspnea and are at an increased risk regarding several different types of lung cancer. as clear explanations are not always stressed in non technical literature care should be taken to distinguish between several forms of relevant diseases. according to the world health organization these may be defined as asbestosis lung cancer and peritoneal mesothelioma. biological sources of air pollution are also found indoors as gases and airborne particulates. pets produce dander people produce dust from minute skin flakes and decomposed hair dust mites in bedding carpeting and furniture produce enzymes and micrometre sized fecal droppings inhabitants emit methane mold forms on walls and generates mycotoxins and spores air conditioning systems can incubate legionnaires disease and mold and houseplants soil and surrounding gardens can produce pollen dust and mold. indoors the lack of air circulation allows these airborne pollutants to accumulate more than they would otherwise occur in nature. even at levels lower than those considered safe by united states regulators exposure to three components of air pollution fine particulate matter nitrogen dioxide and ozone correlates with cardiac and respiratory illness. in air pollution caused one in eight deaths in europe and was a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related diseases including respiratory infections heart disease copd stroke and lung cancer. the health effects caused by air pollution may include difficulty in breathing wheezing coughing asthma and worsening of existing respiratory and cardiac conditions. these effects can result in increased medication use increased doctor or emergency department visits more hospital admissions and premature death. the human health effects of poor air quality are far reaching but principally affect the bodys respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. individual reactions to air pollutants depend on the type of pollutant a person is exposed to the degree of exposure and the individuals health status and genetics. the most common sources of air pollution include particulates ozone nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. children aged less than five years who live in developing countries are the most vulnerable population in terms of total deaths attributable to indoor and outdoor air pollution. the world health organization estimated in that every year air pollution causes the premature death of some million people worldwide. studies published in march indicated that the number may be around. million. india has the highest death rate due to air pollution. india also has more deaths from asthma than any other nation according to the world health organization. in december air pollution was estimated to kill people in china each year. there is a positive correlation between pneumonia related deaths and air pollution from motor vehicle emissions. annual premature european deaths caused by air pollution are estimated at an important cause of these deaths is nitrogen dioxide and other nitrogen oxides emitted by road vehicles. in a consultation document the uk government disclosed that nitrogen dioxide is responsible for premature uk deaths per annum. across the european union air pollution is estimated to reduce life expectancy by almost nine months. causes of deaths include strokes heart disease copd lung cancer and lung infections. urban outdoor air pollution is estimated to cause. million deaths worldwide per year. children are particularly at risk due to the immaturity of their respiratory organ systems. the us epa estimated in that a proposed set of changes in diesel engine technology could result in fewer premature mortalities fewer heart attacks fewer emergency department visits by children with asthma and fewer respiratory related hospital admissions each year in the united states. the us epa has estimated that limiting ground level ozone concentration to parts per billion would avert to premature deaths nationwide in compared with the ppb standard. the agency projected the more protective standard would also prevent an additional cases of aggravated asthma and more than a million cases of missed work or school. following this assessment the epa acted to protect public health by lowering the national ambient air quality standards for ground level ozone to parts per billion. a new economic study of the health impacts and associated costs of air pollution in the los angeles basin and san joaquin valley of southern california shows that more than people die prematurely each year because air pollution levels violate federal standards. the number of annual premature deaths is considerably higher than the fatalities related to auto collisions in the same area which average fewer than per year. a study found that outdoor air pollution is associated with substantially increased mortality even at low pollution levels below the current european and north american standards and who guideline values shortly before the who adjusted its guidelines. the largest cause is air pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion mostly the production and use of cars electricity production and heating. needed diesel exhaust is a major contributor to combustion derived particulate matter air pollution. in several human experimental studies using a well validated exposure chamber setup de has been linked to acute vascular dysfunction and increased thrombus formation. the mechanisms linking air pollution to increased cardiovascular mortality are uncertain but probably include pulmonary and systemic inflammation. a study by greenpeace estimates there are. million annual premature deaths worldwide because of pollutants released by high emission power stations and vehicle exhausts deaths occur in the middle east each year due to pollution. a study by scientists of u. k. and u. s. universities that uses a high spatial resolution model and an updated concentration response function concluded in that. million global excess deaths in and. million in or a fifth were due to air pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion significantly higher than earlier estimates and with spatially subdivided mortality impacts. a review of evidence found that ambient air pollution exposure is a risk factor correlating with increased total mortality from cardiovascular events. air pollution is also emerging as a risk factor for stroke particularly in developing countries where pollutant levels are highest. a study found that in women air pollution is not associated with hemorrhagic but with ischemic stroke. air pollution was also found to be associated with increased incidence and mortality from coronary stroke in a cohort study in. associations are believed to be causal and effects may be mediated by vasoconstriction low grade inflammation and atherosclerosis other mechanisms such as autonomic nervous system imbalance have also been suggested. research has demonstrated increased risk of developing asthma and copd from increased exposure to traffic related air pollution. additionally air pollution has been associated with increased hospitalization and mortality from asthma and copd. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease includes diseases such as chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a study conducted in in the wake of the great smog of compared london residents with residents of gloucester peterborough and norwich three towns with low reported death rates from chronic bronchitis. all subjects were male postal truck drivers aged to. compared to the subjects from the outlying towns the london subjects exhibited more severe respiratory symptoms reduced lung function and increased sputum production and purulence. the differences were more pronounced for subjects aged to. the study controlled for age and smoking habits so concluded that air pollution was the most likely cause of the observed differences. more studies have shown that air pollution exposure from traffic reduces lung function development in children and lung function may be compromised by air pollution even at low concentrations. air pollution exposure also cause lung cancer in non smokers. it is believed that much like cystic fibrosis by living in a more urban environment serious health hazards become more apparent. studies have shown that in urban areas people suffer mucus hypersecretion lower levels of lung function and more self diagnosis of chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a review of evidence regarding whether ambient air pollution exposure is a risk factor for cancer in found solid data to conclude that long term exposure to pm. increases the overall risk of non accidental mortality by per a microg m increase. exposure to pm. was also associated with an increased risk of mortality from lung cancer and total cardiovascular mortality. the review further noted that living close to busy traffic appears to be associated with elevated risks of these three outcomes increase in lung cancer deaths cardiovascular deaths and overall non accidental deaths. the reviewers also found suggestive evidence that exposure to pm. is positively associated with mortality from coronary heart diseases and exposure to so increases mortality from lung cancer but the data was insufficient to provide solid conclusions. another investigation showed that higher activity level increases deposition fraction of aerosol particles in human lung and recommended avoiding heavy activities like running in outdoor space at polluted areas. in a large danish epidemiological study found an increased risk of lung cancer for people who lived in areas with high nitrogen oxide concentrations. in this study the association was higher for non smokers than smokers. an additional danish study also in likewise noted evidence of possible associations between air pollution and other forms of cancer including cervical cancer and brain cancer. in a study of taiwanese residents over a period of estimated that every g m decrease in the ambient concentration of pm. was associated with a reduced risk of chronic kidney disease development. in the united states despite the passage of the clean air act in in at least million americans were living in non attainment areasregions in which the concentration of certain air pollutants exceeded federal standards. these dangerous pollutants are known as the criteria pollutants and include ozone particulate matter sulfur dioxide nitrogen dioxide carbon monoxide and lead. protective measures to ensure childrens health are being taken in cities such as new delhi india where buses now use compressed natural gas to help eliminate the pea soup smog. a recent study in europe has found that exposure to ultrafine particles can increase blood pressure in children. according to a who report in polluted air leads to the poisoning of millions of children under the age of resulting in the death of some six hundred thousand children annually. prenatal exposure to polluted air has been linked to a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders in children. for example exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons was associated with reduced iq scores and symptoms of anxiety and depression. they can also lead to detrimental perinatal health outcomes that are often fatal in developing countries. a study found that pahs might play a role in the development of childhood attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. researchers have also begun to find evidence for air pollution as a risk factor for autism spectrum disorder. in los angeles children who were living in areas with high levels of traffic related air pollution were more likely to be diagnosed with autism between years of age. the connection between air pollution and neurodevelopmental disorders in children is thought to be related to epigenetic dysregulation of the primordial germ cells embryo and fetus during a critical period. some pahs are considered endocrine disruptors and are lipid soluble. when they build up in adipose tissue they can be transferred across the placenta. ambient levels of air pollution have been associated with preterm birth and low birth weight. a who worldwide survey on maternal and perinatal health found a statistically significant association between low birth weights and increased levels of exposure to pm.. women in regions with greater than average pm. levels had statistically significant higher odds of pregnancy resulting in a low birth weight infant even when adjusted for country related variables. the effect is thought to be from stimulating inflammation and increasing oxidative stress. a study by the university of york found that in exposure to pm. was strongly associated with of preterm births globally which was approximately. million premature births. the countries with the highest air pollution associated preterm births were in south and east asia the middle east north africa and west sub saharan africa. the source of pm. differs greatly by region. in south and east asia pregnant women are frequently exposed to indoor air pollution because of wood and other biomass fuels being used for cooking which are responsible for more than of regional pollution. in the middle east north africa and west sub saharan africa fine pm comes from natural sources such as dust storms. the united states had an estimated preterm births associated with exposure to pm. in. a study performed by wang et al. between the years of and has found a correlation between sulfur dioxide and total suspended particulates and preterm births and low birth weights in beijing. a group of pregnant women in four separate regions of beijing were monitored from early pregnancy to delivery along with daily air pollution levels of sulfur dioxide and tsp. the estimated reduction in birth weight was. g for every g m increase in so and. g for each g m increase in tsp. these associations were statistically significant in both summer and winter although summer was greater. the proportion of low birth weight attributable to air pollution was. this is the largest attributable risk ever reported for the known risk factors of low birth weight. coal stoves which are in of homes are a major source of air pollution in this area. brauer et al. studied the relationship between air pollution and proximity to a highway with pregnancy outcomes in a vancouver cohort of pregnant woman using addresses to estimate exposure during pregnancy. exposure to no no co pm and pm. were associated with infants born small for gestational age. women living less than meters away from an expressway or highway were more likely to give birth to a sga infant. even in areas with relatively low levels of air pollution public health effects can be significant and costly since a large number of people breathe in such pollutants. a study published in found that even in areas of the u. s. where ozone and pm. meet federal standards medicare recipients who are exposed to more air pollution have higher mortality rates. a scientific study for the british columbia lung association showed that a small improvement in air quality would produce million in annual savings in the metro vancouver region in. this finding is based on health valuation of lethal and sub lethal affects. in scientists found that the boundary layer air over the southern ocean around antarctica is unpolluted by humans. data is accumulating that air pollution exposure also affects the central nervous system. in a june study conducted by researchers at the university of rochester medical center published in the journal environmental health perspectives it was discovered that early exposure to air pollution causes the same damaging changes in the brain as autism and schizophrenia. the study also shows that air pollution also affected short term memory learning ability and impulsivity. lead researcher professor deborah cory slechta said that when we looked closely at the ventricles we could see that the white matter that normally surrounds them hadnt fully developed. it appears that inflammation had damaged those brain cells and prevented that region of the brain from developing and the ventricles simply expanded to fill the space. our findings add to the growing body of evidence that air pollution may play a role in autism as well as in other neurodevelopmental disorders. in a study of mice air pollution also has a more significant negative effect on males than on females. in experimental studies reported the detection of significant episodic cognitive impairment from impurities in indoor air breathed by test subjects who were not informed about changes in the air quality. researchers at the harvard university and suny upstate medical university and syracuse university measured the cognitive performance of participants in three different controlled laboratory atmospheres that simulated those found in conventional and green buildings as well as green buildings with enhanced ventilation. performance was evaluated objectively using the widely used strategic management simulation software simulation tool which is a well validated assessment test for executive decision making in an unconstrained situation allowing initiative and improvisation. significant deficits were observed in the performance scores achieved in increasing concentrations of either volatile organic compounds or carbon dioxide while keeping other factors constant. the highest impurity levels reached are not uncommon in some classroom or office environments. air pollution increases the risk of dementia in people over years old. in india in it was reported that air pollution by black carbon and ground level ozone had reduced crop yields in the most affected areas by almost half in when compared to levels. air pollution costs the world economy trillion per year as a result of productivity losses and degraded quality of life according to a joint study by the world bank and the institute for health metrics and evaluation at the university of washington. these productivity losses are caused by deaths due to diseases caused by air pollution. one out of ten deaths in was caused by diseases associated with air pollution and the problem is getting worse. the problem is even more acute in the developing world. children under age in lower income countries are more than times as likely to die from exposure to air pollution as children in high income countries. the report states that additional economic losses caused by air pollution including health costs and the adverse effect on agricultural and other productivity were not calculated in the report and thus the actual costs to the world economy are far higher than trillion. artificial air pollution may be detectable on earth from distant vantage points such as other planetary systems via atmospheric seti including no pollution levels and with telescopic technology close to today. it may also be possible to detect extraterrestrial civilizations this way. the worlds worst short term civilian pollution crisis was the bhopal disaster in india. leaked industrial vapours from the union carbide factory belonging to union carbide inc. u. s. a. killed at least people and injured from to. the united kingdom suffered its worst air pollution event when the december great smog of formed over london. in six days more than died and more recent estimates put the figure at nearer. an accidental leak of anthrax spores from a biological warfare laboratory in the former ussr in near sverdlovsk is believed to have caused at least deaths. the worst single incident of air pollution to occur in the us occurred in donora pennsylvania in late october when people died and over were injured. there are now practical alternatives to the principal causes of air pollution various pollution control technologies and strategies are available to reduce air pollution. at its most basic level land use planning is likely to involve zoning and transport infrastructure planning. in most developed countries land use planning is an important part of social policy ensuring that land is used efficiently for the benefit of the wider economy and population as well as to protect the environment. because a large share of air pollution is caused by combustion of fossil fuels such as coal and oil the reduction of these fuels can reduce air pollution drastically. most effective is the switch to clean power sources such as wind power solar power hydro power which dont cause air pollution. efforts to reduce pollution from mobile sources includes expanding regulation to new sources increased fuel efficiency conversion to cleaner fuels and conversion to electric vehicles. titanium dioxide has been researched for its ability to reduce air pollution. ultraviolet light will release free electrons from material thereby creating free radicals which break up vocs and nox gases. one form is superhydrophilic. in prof. tony ryan and prof. simon armitage of university of sheffield prepared a meter by meter sized poster coated with microscopic pollution eating nanoparticles of titanium dioxide. placed on a building this giant poster can absorb the toxic emission from around cars each day. a very effective means to reduce air pollution is the transition to renewable energy. according to a study published in energy and environmental science in the switch to renewable energy in the united states would eliminate about premature mortalities per year and about in if no biomass were used. this would save about billion in health costs a year due to reduced air pollution in or about. of the u. s. gross domestic product. air quality improvement is a near term benefit among the many societal benefits from climate change mitigation. there is limited evidence that efforts to reduce particulate matter in the air can result in better health in africa the middle east eastern europe central asia and southeast asia. the following items are commonly used as pollution control devices in industry and transportation. they can either destroy contaminants or remove them from an exhaust stream before it is emitted into the atmosphere. spatiotemporal monitoring of air quality may be necessary for improving air quality and thereby the health and safety of the public and assessing impacts of interventions. such monitoring is done to different extents with different regulatory requirements with discrepant regional coverage by a variety of organizations and governance entities such as using a variety of technologies for use of the data and sensing such mobile iot sensors satellites and monitoring stations. in general there are two types of air quality standards. the first class of standards set maximum atmospheric concentrations for specific pollutants. environmental agencies enact regulations which are intended to result in attainment of these target levels. the second class take the form of a scale with various thresholds which is used to communicate to the public the relative risk of outdoor activity. the scale may or may not distinguish between different pollutants. in canada air pollution and associated health risks are measured with the air quality health index. it is a health protection tool used to make decisions to reduce short term exposure to air pollution by adjusting activity levels during increased levels of air pollution. the aqhi is a federal program jointly coordinated by health canada and environment canada. however the aqhi program would not be possible without the commitment and support of the provinces municipalities and ngos. from air quality monitoring to health risk communication and community engagement local partners are responsible for the vast majority of work related to aqhi implementation. the aqhi provides a number from to to indicate the level of health risk associated with local air quality. occasionally when the amount of air pollution is abnormally high the number may exceed. the aqhi provides a local air quality current value as well as a local air quality maximums forecast for today tonight and tomorrow and provides associated health advice. as it is now known that even low levels of air pollution can trigger discomfort for the sensitive population the index has been developed as a continuum the higher the number the greater the health risk and need to take precautions. the index describes the level of health risk associated with this number as low moderate high or very high and suggests steps that can be taken to reduce exposure. the measurement is based on the observed relationship of nitrogen dioxide ground level ozone and particulates with mortality from an analysis of several canadian cities. significantly all three of these pollutants can pose health risks even at low levels of exposure especially among those with pre existing health problems. when developing the aqhi health canadas original analysis of health effects included five major air pollutants particulates ozone and nitrogen dioxide as well as sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide. the latter two pollutants provided little information in predicting health effects and were removed from the aqhi formulation. the aqhi does not measure the effects of odour pollen dust heat or humidity. ta luft is the german air quality regulation. air pollution hotspots are areas where air pollution emissions expose individuals to increased negative health effects. they are particularly common in highly populated urban areas where there may be a combination of stationary sources and mobile sources of pollution. emissions from these sources can cause respiratory disease childhood asthma cancer and other health problems. fine particulate matter such as diesel soot which contributes to more than. million premature deaths around the world each year is a significant problem. it is very small and can lodge itself within the lungs and enter the bloodstream. diesel soot is concentrated in densely populated areas and one in six people in the u. s. live near a diesel pollution hot spot. while air pollution hotspots affect a variety of populations some groups are more likely to be located in hotspots. previous studies have shown disparities in exposure to pollution by race and or income. hazardous land uses tend to be located where property values and income levels are low. low socioeconomic status can be a proxy for other kinds of social vulnerability including race a lack of ability to influence regulation and a lack of ability to move to neighborhoods with less environmental pollution. these communities bear a disproportionate burden of environmental pollution and are more likely to face health risks such as cancer or asthma. studies show that patterns in race and income disparities not only indicate a higher exposure to pollution but also higher risk of adverse health outcomes. communities characterized by low socioeconomic status and racial minorities can be more vulnerable to cumulative adverse health impacts resulting from elevated exposure to pollutants than more privileged communities. blacks and latinos generally face more pollution than whites and asians and low income communities bear a higher burden of risk than affluent ones. racial discrepancies are particularly distinct in suburban areas of the southern united states and metropolitan areas of the midwestern and western united states. residents in public housing who are generally low income and can not move to healthier neighborhoods are highly affected by nearby refineries and chemical plants. air pollution is usually concentrated in densely populated metropolitan areas especially in developing countries where environmental regulations are relatively lax or nonexistent. however even populated areas in developed countries attain unhealthy levels of pollution with los angeles and rome being two examples. between and the incidence of lung cancer in beijing near doubled. while smoking remains the leading cause of lung cancer in china the number of smokers is falling while lung cancer rates are rising. in europe council directive ec on ambient air quality assessment and management provides a common strategy against which member states can set objectives for ambient air quality in order to avoid prevent or reduce harmful effects on human health and the environment... and improve air quality where it is unsatisfactory. on july in the case dieter janecek v freistaat bayern the european court of justice ruled that under this directive citizens have the right to require national authorities to implement a short term action plan that aims to maintain or achieve compliance to air quality limit values. this important case law appears to confirm the role of the ec as centralised regulator to european nation states as regards air pollution control. it places a supranational legal obligation on the uk to protect its citizens from dangerous levels of air pollution furthermore superseding national interests with those of the citizen. in the european commission threatened the uk with legal action against the successive breaching of pm limit values. the uk government has identified that if fines are imposed they could cost the nation upwards of million per year. in march the greater london built up area remains the only uk region in breach of the ecs limit values and has been given months to implement an emergency action plan aimed at meeting the eu air quality directive. the city of london has dangerous levels of pm concentrations estimated to cause deaths per year within the city. as well as the threat of eu fines in it was threatened with legal action for scrapping the western congestion charge zone which is claimed to have led to an increase in air pollution levels. in response to these charges boris johnson mayor of london has criticised the current need for european cities to communicate with europe through their nation states central government arguing that in future a great city like london should be permitted to bypass its government and deal directly with the european commission regarding its air quality action plan. this can be interpreted as recognition that cities can transcend the traditional national government organisational hierarchy and develop solutions to air pollution using global governance networks for example through transnational relations. transnational relations include but are not exclusive to national governments and intergovernmental organisations allowing sub national actors including cities and regions to partake in air pollution control as independent actors. particularly promising at present are global city partnerships. these can be built into networks for example the c cities climate leadership group of which london is a member. the c is a public non state network of the worlds leading cities that aims to curb their greenhouse emissions. the c has been identified as governance from the middle and is an alternative to intergovernmental policy. it has the potential to improve urban air quality as participating cities exchange information learn from best practices and consequently mitigate carbon dioxide emissions independently from national government decisions. a criticism of the c network is that its exclusive nature limits influence to participating cities and risks drawing resources away from less powerful city and regional actors. according to a projection by half of the worlds pollution emissions could be generated by africa. potential contributors to such an outcome include increased burning activities traffic agri food and chemical industries sand dust from the sahara and overall population growth. according to oecd by outdoor air pollution is projected to become the top cause of environmentally related deaths worldwide. global warming portal environment portalcategorieswater pollution is the contamination of water bodies usually as a result of human activities in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services that it would otherwise provide. water bodies include for example lakes rivers oceans aquifers reservoirs and groundwater. water pollution results when contaminants are introduced into these water bodies. in addition to damage to many species water pollution can also lead to water borne diseases for people. water pollution traditionally is attributed to four sources which provide the organization of this article water pollution can also be classified as surface water pollution or groundwater pollution. sources of water pollution are either point sources or non point sources. point sources have one identifiable cause such as a storm drain or a wastewater treatment plant. non point sources are more diffuse such as agricultural runoff. pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. supplying clean drinking water is an important ecosystem service provided by some freshwater systems but approximately million people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water because of pollution. a practical definition of water pollution is water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. therefore pollution is associated with concepts attributed to humans namely the negative alterations and the uses of the water body. water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. due to these contaminants it either does not support a human use such as drinking water or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities such as fish. agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution. the use of fertilizers leads to nutrient pollution in which excess nutrients usually caused by nitrogen or phosphorus containing compounds that are the main components. sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farm fields and pastures discharges from septic tanks and feedlots. in addition to plant focused agriculture fish farming is also a source of pollution. additionally ag runoff often contains high levels of pesticides. using the us as an example the main industrial consumers of water are power plants petroleum refineries iron and steel mills pulp and paper mills and food processing industries. some industries discharge nutrients which impose high bod. some wastes are persistent organic pollutants such as per and polyfluoroalkyl substances sewage typically consists of. water and. solids. globally about. billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of according to an estimate by the joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation. lack of access to sanitation often leads to water pollution e. g. via the practice of open defecation. simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events. when sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows. sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to eutrophication. it is a major source of phosphate for example. sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene cosmetics pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites even at very low concentrations hormones and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action can have an adverse impacts. water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide ranging consequences the environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products is being investigated since at least the s. ppcps include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. more than twenty million tons of ppcps are produced every year. the european union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be priority substances. the source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces sewage blackwater manure that has found its way into the water body. the cause for this can be lack of sanitation or poorly functioning on site sanitation systems sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows during storm events and intensive agriculture. pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include burkholderia pseudomallei cryptosporidium parvum giardia lamblia salmonella norovirus and other viruses parasitic worms including the schistosoma type. a study published in stated that polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed. million people. urban runoff is stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops roads and parking lots and reservoirs. often it is captured in large retaining ponds. it is subject to high suspended solids as well and elevated nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. thermal pollution sometimes called thermal enrichment is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature. thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence. thermal pollution unlike chemical pollution results in a change in the physical properties of water. a common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. the introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. it causes biological pollution. sources of surface water pollution can be grouped into two categories based on their origin point sources and nonpoint sources. point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single identifiable source such as a pipe or ditch. examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant a factory or a city storm drain. the u. s. clean water act defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes. the cwa definition of point source was amended in to include municipal storm sewer systems as well as industrial storm water such as from construction sites. groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater. this type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent contaminant or impurity in the groundwater in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution. pollution can occur from on site sanitation systems landfills effluent from wastewater treatment plants leaking sewers petrol filling stations or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture. pollution can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants such as arsenic or fluoride. using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods physical chemical and biological. some methods may be conducted in situ without sampling such as temperature. others involve collection of samples followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. standardized validated analytical test methods for water and wastewater samples have been published. common physical tests of water include temperature specific conductance or electrical conductance or conductivity solids concentrations and turbidity. water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. frequently used parameters that are quantified are ph biochemical oxygen demand chemical oxygen demand dissolved oxygen total hardness nutrients metals oil and grease total petroleum hydrocarbons surfactants and pesticides. the complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on site because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings. measurements commonly made on site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature ph dissolved oxygen conductivity oxygen reduction potential turbidity and secchi disk depth. sampling of water for physical or chemical testing can be done by several methods depending on the accuracy needed and the characteristics of the contaminant. sampling methods include for example simple random sampling stratified sampling systematic and grid sampling adaptive cluster sampling grab samples semi continuous monitoring and continuous passive sampling remote surveillance remote sensing and biomonitoring. the use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. the use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring. this refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment. biological testing involves the use of plant animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem. they are any biological species or group of species whose function population or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present. one example of a group of bio indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. such organisms can be monitored for changes that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries. for example water pollution in india and china is wide spread. about percent of the water in the cities of china is polluted. one aspect of environmental protection are mandatory regulations but they are only part of the solution. other important tools in pollution control include environmental education economic instruments market forces and stricter enforcements. standards can be precise or imprecise which would require the use of best available technology or best practicable environmental option. market based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges subsidies deposit or refund schemes the creation of a market in pollution credits and enforcement incentives. moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches integrated control measures trans boundary considerations complementary and supplementary control measures life cycle considerations the impacts of chemical mixtures. control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. the infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants. agricultural wastewater treatment for farms and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow. water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels. municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants decentralized wastewater systems nature based solutions or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. for example waste stabilization ponds are a low cost treatment option for sewage particularly for regions with warm climates. uv light can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds. the use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation. well designed and operated systems can remove percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage. some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. while such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants they can also result in large financial costs as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system. in the us cities with large combined systems have not pursued system wide separation projects due to the high cost but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches. in some cases municipalities have installed additional cso storage facilities or expanded sewage treatment capacity. agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals in fertilizer pesticides animal slurry crop residues or irrigation water. agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. it may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater. where land is available for ponds settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles. animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland. constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes. nonpoint source pollution includes sediment runoff nutrient runoff and pesticides. point source pollution includes animal wastes silage liquor milking parlour wastes slaughtering waste vegetable washing water and firewater. many farms generate nonpoint source pollution from surface runoff which is not controlled through a treatment plant. sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls such as mulching and hydroseeding and sediment controls such as sediment basins and silt fences. discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans and specially designed containers and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms. erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology also results in loss of sediment and potentially water pollution. effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of storm water as well as reducing pollutant discharges. local governments use a variety of storm water management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. these techniques called best management practices for water pollution in some countries may focus on water quantity control while others focus on improving water quality and some perform both functions. some examples for legislation to control water pollution are listed below categorieswater pollution is the contamination of water bodies usually as a result of human activities in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services that it would otherwise provide. water bodies include for example lakes rivers oceans aquifers reservoirs and groundwater. water pollution results when contaminants are introduced into these water bodies. in addition to damage to many species water pollution can also lead to water borne diseases for people. water pollution traditionally is attributed to four sources which provide the organization of this article water pollution can also be classified as surface water pollution or groundwater pollution. sources of water pollution are either point sources or non point sources. point sources have one identifiable cause such as a storm drain or a wastewater treatment plant. non point sources are more diffuse such as agricultural runoff. pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. supplying clean drinking water is an important ecosystem service provided by some freshwater systems but approximately million people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water because of pollution. a practical definition of water pollution is water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses. therefore pollution is associated with concepts attributed to humans namely the negative alterations and the uses of the water body. water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. due to these contaminants it either does not support a human use such as drinking water or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities such as fish. agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution. the use of fertilizers leads to nutrient pollution in which excess nutrients usually caused by nitrogen or phosphorus containing compounds that are the main components. sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farm fields and pastures discharges from septic tanks and feedlots. in addition to plant focused agriculture fish farming is also a source of pollution. additionally ag runoff often contains high levels of pesticides. using the us as an example the main industrial consumers of water are power plants petroleum refineries iron and steel mills pulp and paper mills and food processing industries. some industries discharge nutrients which impose high bod. some wastes are persistent organic pollutants such as per and polyfluoroalkyl substances sewage typically consists of. water and. solids. globally about. billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of according to an estimate by the joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation. lack of access to sanitation often leads to water pollution e. g. via the practice of open defecation. simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events. when sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows. sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to eutrophication. it is a major source of phosphate for example. sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene cosmetics pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites even at very low concentrations hormones and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action can have an adverse impacts. water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide ranging consequences the environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products is being investigated since at least the s. ppcps include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. more than twenty million tons of ppcps are produced every year. the european union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be priority substances. the source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces sewage blackwater manure that has found its way into the water body. the cause for this can be lack of sanitation or poorly functioning on site sanitation systems sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows during storm events and intensive agriculture. pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include burkholderia pseudomallei cryptosporidium parvum giardia lamblia salmonella norovirus and other viruses parasitic worms including the schistosoma type. a study published in stated that polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed. million people. urban runoff is stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops roads and parking lots and reservoirs. often it is captured in large retaining ponds. it is subject to high suspended solids as well and elevated nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. thermal pollution sometimes called thermal enrichment is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature. thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence. thermal pollution unlike chemical pollution results in a change in the physical properties of water. a common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. the introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. it causes biological pollution. sources of surface water pollution can be grouped into two categories based on their origin point sources and nonpoint sources. point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single identifiable source such as a pipe or ditch. examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant a factory or a city storm drain. the u. s. clean water act defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes. the cwa definition of point source was amended in to include municipal storm sewer systems as well as industrial storm water such as from construction sites. groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater. this type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent contaminant or impurity in the groundwater in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution. pollution can occur from on site sanitation systems landfills effluent from wastewater treatment plants leaking sewers petrol filling stations or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture. pollution can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants such as arsenic or fluoride. using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods physical chemical and biological. some methods may be conducted in situ without sampling such as temperature. others involve collection of samples followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. standardized validated analytical test methods for water and wastewater samples have been published. common physical tests of water include temperature specific conductance or electrical conductance or conductivity solids concentrations and turbidity. water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. frequently used parameters that are quantified are ph biochemical oxygen demand chemical oxygen demand dissolved oxygen total hardness nutrients metals oil and grease total petroleum hydrocarbons surfactants and pesticides. the complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on site because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings. measurements commonly made on site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature ph dissolved oxygen conductivity oxygen reduction potential turbidity and secchi disk depth. sampling of water for physical or chemical testing can be done by several methods depending on the accuracy needed and the characteristics of the contaminant. sampling methods include for example simple random sampling stratified sampling systematic and grid sampling adaptive cluster sampling grab samples semi continuous monitoring and continuous passive sampling remote surveillance remote sensing and biomonitoring. the use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. the use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring. this refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment. biological testing involves the use of plant animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem. they are any biological species or group of species whose function population or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present. one example of a group of bio indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. such organisms can be monitored for changes that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries. for example water pollution in india and china is wide spread. about percent of the water in the cities of china is polluted. one aspect of environmental protection are mandatory regulations but they are only part of the solution. other important tools in pollution control include environmental education economic instruments market forces and stricter enforcements. standards can be precise or imprecise which would require the use of best available technology or best practicable environmental option. market based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges subsidies deposit or refund schemes the creation of a market in pollution credits and enforcement incentives. moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches integrated control measures trans boundary considerations complementary and supplementary control measures life cycle considerations the impacts of chemical mixtures. control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. the infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants. agricultural wastewater treatment for farms and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow. water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels. municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants decentralized wastewater systems nature based solutions or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. for example waste stabilization ponds are a low cost treatment option for sewage particularly for regions with warm climates. uv light can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds. the use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation. well designed and operated systems can remove percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage. some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. while such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants they can also result in large financial costs as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system. in the us cities with large combined systems have not pursued system wide separation projects due to the high cost but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches. in some cases municipalities have installed additional cso storage facilities or expanded sewage treatment capacity. agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals in fertilizer pesticides animal slurry crop residues or irrigation water. agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. it may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater. where land is available for ponds settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles. animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland. constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes. nonpoint source pollution includes sediment runoff nutrient runoff and pesticides. point source pollution includes animal wastes silage liquor milking parlour wastes slaughtering waste vegetable washing water and firewater. many farms generate nonpoint source pollution from surface runoff which is not controlled through a treatment plant. sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls such as mulching and hydroseeding and sediment controls such as sediment basins and silt fences. discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans and specially designed containers and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms. erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology also results in loss of sediment and potentially water pollution. effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of storm water as well as reducing pollutant discharges. local governments use a variety of storm water management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. these techniques called best management practices for water pollution in some countries may focus on water quantity control while others focus on improving water quality and some perform both functions. some examples for legislation to control water pollution are listed below water pollution is a major environmental issue in india. the largest source of water pollution in india is untreatedsewage. other sources of pollution include agricultural runoff and unregulated small scale industry. most rivers lakes and surface water in india are polluted due to industries untreated sewage and solid wastes. a study found that discharge of untreated sewage is the single most important source of pollution of surface and ground water in india. there is a large gap between generation and treatment of domestic waste water in india. the problem is not only that india lacks sufficient treatment capacity but also that the sewage treatment plants that exist do not operate and are not maintained. the majority of the government owned sewage treatment plants remain closed most of the time due to improper design or poor maintenance or lack of reliable electricity supply to operate the plants together with absentee employees and poor management. the waste water generated in these areas normally percolates into the soil or evaporates. the uncollected waste accumulates in the urban areas causing unhygienic conditions and releasing pollutants that leach into surface and groundwater. sewage discharged from cities towns and some villages is the predominant cause of water pollution in india. investment is needed to bridge the gap between the sewage india generates and its treatment capacity of sewage per day. major cities of india produce million litres per day of sewage but the urban sewage treatment capacity is only mld. a large number of indian rivers are severely polluted as a result of discharge of domestic sewage. the central pollution control board a ministry of environment forests government of india entity has established a national water quality monitoring network comprising monitoring stations in states and in union territories on various rivers and water bodies across the country. this effort monitors water quality year round. the monitoring network covers rivers lakes tanks ponds creeks canals drains and wells distributed across india. water samples are routinely analysed for parameters including dissolved oxygen bacteriological and other internationally established parameters for water quality. additionally trace metals parameters and pesticide residues are analysed. biomonitoring is also carried out on specific locations. the scientific analysis of water samples from to indicates that the organic and bacterial contamination is severe in water bodies of india. this is mainly due to discharge of domestic waste water in untreated form mostly from the urban centres of india. in the water quality monitoring found almost all rivers with high levels of bod. the worst pollution in decreasing order were found in river markanda followed by river kali river amlakhadi yamuna canal river yamuna at delhi and river betwa. for context a water sample with a day bod between and mg o l indicates a very clean water to mg o l indicates a moderately clean water to indicates borderline water and greater than mg o l indicates ecologically unsafe polluted water. the levels of bod are severe near the cities and major towns. in rural parts of india the river bod levels were sufficient to support aquatic life. rivers yamuna ganga gomti ghaghara chambal mahi vardha and godavari are amongst the other most coliform polluted water bodies in india. for context coliform must be below mpn ml preferably absent from water for it to be considered safe for general human use and for irrigation where coliform may cause disease outbreak from contaminated water in agriculture. in percent of water quality monitoring reported coliform concentrations above mpn ml. during percent of all water quality monitoring stations reported a total coliform levels exceeding those levels suggesting recent effort to add pollution control infrastructure and upgrade treatment plants in india may be reversing the water pollution trend. treatment of domestic sewage and subsequent utilization of treated sewage for irrigation can prevent pollution of water bodies reduce the demand for fresh water in the irrigation sector and become a resource for irrigation. since indian wastewater treatment plant market has been growing annually at the rate of to percent. the united states is the largest supplier of treatment equipment and supplies to india with percent market share of new installation. at that rate of expansion and assuming the government of india continues on its path of reform major investments in sewage treatment plants and electricity infrastructure development it was estimated india will nearly triple its water treatment capacity by and treatment capacity supply will match indias daily sewage water treatment requirements by about. water conservation in india is gaining pace. the ganga rejuvenation efforts by the union government the yamuna clean up are some of the government initiated efforts. the chennai river restoration trusts efforts to clean the cooum adyar rivers in chennai and civil society efforts spearheaded by organizations like environmentalist foundation of india to clean lakes and ponds in the country are seen as significant development towards water conservation. a joint study by pgimer and the punjab pollution control board in revealed that in villages along the nullah fluoride mercury beta endosulphan and heptachlor pesticide were more than permissible limit in ground and tap water. plus the water had high concentration of cod and bod ammonia phosphate chloride chromium arsenic and chlorpyrifos pesticide. the ground water also contains nickel and selenium while the tap water has high concentration of lead nickel and cadmium. flooding during monsoons worsens indias water pollution problem as it washes and moves solid waste and contaminated soils into its rivers and wetlands. the annual average precipitation in india is about billion cubic metres. from this with the state of indian infrastructure in the available water resource through the rivers is about billion cubic meters. accounting to uneven distribution of rain over the country each year water resources available for utilization including ground water is claimed to be about billion cubic meters. much of this water is unsafe because pollution degrades water quality. water pollution severely limits the amount of water available to indian consumers its industry and its agriculture. more than million people live along the river. an estimated persons ritually bath daily in the river which is considered holy by hindus. ganges river pollution is a major health risk. nrgba was established by the central government of india on february under section of the environment protection act. it also declared ganges as the national river of india. the chair includes the prime minister of india and chief ministers of states through which the ganges flows. by an estimate by delhis sacred yamuna river contained coliform bacteria per cc of water. a number of ngos pressure groups eco clubs as well as citizens movements have been active in their task to clean the river. even though india revised its national water policy in to encourage community participation and decentralize water management the countrys complex bureaucracy ensures that it remains a mere statement of intent. responsibility for managing water issues is fragmented among a dozen different ministries and departments without any coordination. the government bureaucracy and state run project department has failed to solve the problem despite having spent many years and million on this project. water pollution in the united states is a growing problem that became critical in the century with the development of mechanized agriculture mining and industry although laws and regulations introduced in the late century have improved water quality in many water bodies. extensive industrialization and rapid urban growth exacerbated water pollution as a lack of regulation allowed for discharges of sewage toxic chemicals nutrients and other pollutants into surface water. in the early century communities began to install drinking water treatment systems but control of the principal pollution sourcesdomestic sewage industry and agriculturewas not effectively addressed in the us until the later century. these pollution sources can affect both groundwater and surface water. multiple pollution incidents such as the kingston fossil plant coal fly ash slurry spill and the deepwater horizon oil spill have left lasting impacts on water quality ecosystems and public health in the united states. many solutions to water pollution in the united states can be implemented to curtail water pollution. this includes municipal wastewater treatment agricultural and industrial wastewater treatment erosion and sediment control and the control of urban runoff. the continued implementation of pollution prevention control and treatment measures are used to pursue the goal of maintaining water quality within levels specified in federal and state regulations. however many water bodies across the country continue to violate water quality standards in the century. water pollution was identified as a growing problem in the us by scientists government officials and the public in the century. many cities and towns piped their untreated domestic sewage into nearby waterways. wastewater discharged by factories mines and other businesses increased as the economy expanded. large cities and later smaller communities began to install drinking water treatment systems in the early century but sewage treatment plants were limited at that time and not very effective. effective control of sewage and industrial pollution was not comprehensively addressed until later in the century. agricultural pollution emerged as a growing problem in the century with the increased mechanization of agriculture and increasing use of chemicals. following the passage of thelean water act the levels of water pollution in us waterways generally have experienced a dramatic decrease with respect to sewage treatment and many types of industrial wastewater. however more than half of u. s. stream and river miles continue to violate federal water quality standards in the century. surveys of lakes ponds and reservoirs indicated that about percent were impaired and a little more than percent of the nation s coastlines and percent of the surveyed ocean and near coastal areas were also impaired. in a report on water quality in the united states in percent of assessed stream miles percent of assessed lake acres and percent of assessed bays and estuarine square miles were classified as polluted. agriculture industry urban runoff and other sources continue to discharge waste into surface waters nationwide. this poses huge environmental and health risks given that these water sources are used as drinking water and for agricultural use. while the cwa has made positive contributions to the state of surface water in the united states the law does not fully address all aspects of pollution. many think that congress should revise or expand the law to address these problems and gaps in regulation. although the cwa has been effective in controlling point source pollution it has not been as effective with nonpoint sources. despite the negative health and ecosystem impacts of water pollution solutions exist that are able to treat and decrease pollution levels in water bodies. surface water consists of all forms of visible water sources such as oceans lakes and rivers. currently a significant percentage of surface freshwater sources are polluted in the united states. this poses a huge threat to american water sources because over of water used in the united states is from these freshwater sources. a majority of freshwater contamination cases are a result of nutrient pollution which is the result of farm waste and fertilizer entering the water source and resulting in toxic zones with depleted oxygen levels. groundwater is rainfall that collects in porous spaces deep underground which are called aquifers. humans can access the water that collects in an aquifer by building wells to pump the water to the surface for use. about of drinking water in america comes from groundwater sources. when contaminants enter aquifers the pollution spreads eliminating the potential to use the aquifer for drinking water. groundwater contamination is often the result of chemicals that seep through the soil and into the water supply such as pesticides and fertilizers. other causes of contamination in groundwater includes gasoline oil road salts septic tank waste or leakage from landfills. point source pollution occurs when water pollution contamination comes from a single source. point sources could include leaking septic tanks oil spills dumping of waste or wastewater treatment facilities. in order to prevent point source pollution from occurring the clean water act regulates what can be discharged into a water body by requiring each facility to obtain a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit. nonpoint source pollution occurs when the contamination derives from multiple different sources. this type of pollution is very challenging to manage given that the original source may be difficult to identify. nonpoint source pollution is the most common type of pollution because as rainfall runs off of land on its path to different water sources it becomes contaminated by pollutants from the surrounding area. these sources include agriculture related pollutants urban runoff or drainage. the cwa does not authorize the issuance of npdes permits for nonpoint sources trans boundary water pollution occurs when pollution in one country s waters spreads and damages another country s environment or water supply. trans boundary pollution can travel through rivers or ocean currents. historically municipal sewage was a major contributor of water pollution across the united states. the lack of proper treatment of sewage resulted in many contaminated water bodies across the county. domestic sewage became a widespread problem with the onset of the industrial revolution in the century population growth and increasing urbanization. through the early century most communities had no sewage treatment plants or waste disposal sites. some cities built sewer pipes which carried their sewage to a nearby river or coastal area but lacked any treatment of the wastes instead depositing the sewage directly into the water. the first wastewater treatment plants were built in the late and early centuries in the united states and typically did not fully treat the wastes. the extensive construction of new and upgraded sewage treatment systems following the passage of thelean water act has greatly reduced municipal discharges. since the s secondary treatment has been the national standard for municipalities. some individual systems continue to cause localized water quality problems due to outdated or leaking piping and collection systems leading to combined sewer overflows and sanitary sewer overflows. poor upkeep of sewer infrastructure results in contamination from leaks and contributed to a rating from the american society of civil engineers of a d grade for americas wastewater infrastructure. while all domestic wastewater is now treated nationwide leaks and spills of municipal sewage pose a significant problem because wastewater carries diseases like salmonella hepatitis and many other infectious diseases that roughly sickens about. million americans every year. water research during the late s and s indicated that stormwater runoff was a significant cause of water quality impairment in many parts of the us. increased land development throughout the countryin both cities and suburbshas led to an increase in impervious surfaces which generates increased surface runoff during wet weather. the development of new roads and smooth surfaces have contributed to polluted waters easily flowing into nearby rivers lakes and the oceans across the usa. these paved surfaces and roads restrict water from soaking into the ground and instead allows water to freely flow across pavements while picking up chemicals fertilizers pesticides and many other pollutants that causes water pollution in the bodies of water in the usa. early indications of pollution from industrial waste in the united states existed since the s increasing as the industrial revolution expanded throughout the united states and its environmental impacts were observed more frequently. industrial wastes contribute toxic pollutants and chemicals and can have detrimental ecosystem and public health impacts if discharged directly into surface water. historical accounts of early industrial activity in the us provide a general description of the kinds of waste generated. mining operations iron forges and blast furnaces were some of the early industries in the u. s. that generated waste. in the late and early centuries wastes from mining operations entered rivers and streams and iron bloomeries and furnaces used water for cooling. these industries were relatively small businesses generating small amounts of product and the wastes they discharged to rivers and streams were proportionately dilute. however as factories grew in the century so did the quantity of pollution produced. in the early century the introduction of steam engines in both the mining and manufacturing sectors greatly expanded productivity and increased use of the engines generated larger volumes of heated water. the productivity gains along with the introduction of railroads in the s and swhich increased the overall demand for coal and mineralsled to additional generation of wastes. the volumes and concentrations of industrial wastes increased significantly in the mid century in multiple business sectors including mining. mining wastes were increasing not only from coal and mineral mines in the east and south but from mining of gold silver and other metals in the newly developing west. the onset of the second industrial revolution in the mid to late century introduced new heavy industries in the us generating larger volumes and new kinds of wastes. these industries included industrial expansion continued into the century including large scale expansion of paper products manufacturing which produced additional types and quantities of wastes. today industrial pollution is caused by discharges and emissions from manufacturing plants in certain industries which continues to pollute surface waters nationwide. many manufacturing processes generate wastewater contributing to the water pollution found in rivers lakes and oceans. in the u. s. environmental protection agency found that fossil fuel power stations particularly coal fired plants were the largest contributors of industrial water pollution. epa found instances where power plants discharged toxic pollutants such as mercury arsenic and lead into surface waters. although many industrial facilities have added or expanded their wastewater treatment systems to comply with the cwa certain industrial sectors and facilities have not addressed all components in their discharges and continue to contribute significant quantities of pollutants to surface waters in the us. based on a report of industrial and commercial facilities subject to the epa toxics release inventory system discharges of toxic pollutants in totaled about million pounds a decrease of million pounds from mostly due to reduced nitrate discharges. discharges and chemicals from agriculture greatly contributes to water pollution in the us as rainwater flows through fields and into bodies of water. the application of chemical fertilizers collection of animal manure and use of chemicals used by farmers results in nitrogen and phosphorus. when washed away from farming fields nitrogen and phosphorus found in fertilizers can cause eutrophication of water bodies. eutrophication results in algal blooms which deplete oxygen in bodies of water resulting in dead zones where life can no longer be sustained. excessive use or improper use of fertilizers pesticides and various types of chemicals during farming contribute to water pollution and are currently the third largest source for water pollution in lakes second largest source of water pollution in wetlands and a major contributor to pollution in estuaries and ground water. other activities that contribute to water pollution include municipal wastewater is composed of human waste and other residential waste streams. in the united states approximately billion gallons of wastewater are collected every day and sent to sewage treatment plants. wastewater is collected through combined sewers which are used for sanitary waste and stormwater runoff or in separate sanitary sewers. sewage treatment plants include physical removal processes such as screens and settling tanks and biological processes to remove organic matter and pathogens from water. treatment plants have strict permit requirements to ensure that their discharges will not cause harm to the environment or public health. some plants have enhanced treatment processes to control nutrient pollution before discharge. agricultural run off is one of the leading causes of water pollution in the united states. funding from clean water grants are available to farmers to install projects to help control agricultural pollution before it enters water sources. methods to minimize and contain water pollution from agriculture in the united states include watershed efforts nutrient management cover crops buffers management of livestock waste and drainage management. buffers are small strips of land covered in plants that are able to remove pollutants such as nitrogen phosphorus and sediment prior to discharge in a water body. both buffers and crop covers are used to remove these pollutants from agricultural runoff. erosion and sediment controls are techniques used to mitigate sediment pollution in waterways. the most common and efficient control method on agricultural land is crop management which increases soil cover and stabilizes slopes. without proper soil stabilization techniques rainfall can cause large quantities of sediment to be washed away into waterways creating issues with sunlight penetration and visibility. typical preventive measures for construction sites include erosion control matting and mulching and installation of silt fences to trap sediment not captured by the erosion controls. urban areas affect water quality by increasing the volume of run off and pollutant loads. one solution to decrease run off is constructing new surfaces with pervious pavers that allow rainwater to pass through the surface to groundwater aquifers and decrease the quantity of urban run off. additionally proper use and storage of household chemicals are critical to decrease incidences of spills that pollute local waterways. the deepwater horizon oil spill is considered to be the largest marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry. the incident began on april when a semi submersible bp oil rig exploded in the gulf of mexico about miles off of the coast of louisiana. the explosion led to discharges between to barrels of oil per day. it took responders days to stop the spill at which point the rig had leaked an estimated. million barrels of oil into the gulf. over miles of shoreline on the gulf of mexico from texas to florida were impacted by the deepwater horizon spill. of the crew members present during the deepwater horizon oil spill died and were seriously injured. in addition the frequency of hurricanes in the gulf makes the effects of long term exposure on humans more applicable as these storms are capable of carrying crude oil over miles of ocean towards the shore. according to a research article from lsu damages to those living in the presence of crude oil the past years are likely permanent as chronic exposure leads to increased cancer risks cardiovascular issues and respiratory problems. oil exposure and its respiratory effects were also analyzed in a study on the coast guard personnel deployed to help clean up the spill. the article has. of responders stating they were exposed to crude oil and. stating they were exposed to oil dispersants. of the nearly personnel who completed the survey. experienced coughing. experienced shortness of breath and. experienced wheezing. the study also found that exposure to both oil and oil dispersants presented associations that were much stronger than oil alone for the different respiratory symptoms. the northeast gulf of mexico shoreline contains about percent of the coastal and freshwater marshes in the united states. a marsh environment tends to have standing water making it among the most sensitive habitats to oil spills. without the natural cleaning mechanism that flowing water provides oil is able to coat marsh vegetation for longer periods of time ruining nurseries that then impact a host of interconnected species. the gulf of mexico is also home to species of marine mammals. of these up to percent of all kemp s ridley sea turtles present during the spill ended up dying and the louisiana bottlenose dolphin ended up facing a percent decline in population. however because the bp oil spill occurred miles from any land it wasn t as damaging to ecosystems along the shore as other oil spills. however habitats along the shore were still exposed through balls of tar that would clump together and wash up on beaches impacting local wildlife. also the consequences that drifting plumes of oil had on the deep sea ecosystem is relatively unknown. in december the u. s. filed a complaint in district court against bp and several other defendants associated with the spill. the complaint resulted in a record setting settlement enforcing a. billion clean water act penalty on bp exploration production and up to. billion in natural resource damages. however by bp had successfully recuperated most of the billion lost in market value after the spill. this recovery was attributed to the company s inclination to continue exploring new oil resources despite the accident. between and bp s gulf of mexico oil rigs doubled and they began investing billion towards opportunities in alaska in. on the other hand a article from npr exhibited how fishing cities along the gulf coast are still feeling harmful effects of the oil spill. in an interview with an oysterman from alabama he states business is still struggling... because of the lack of oyster production... i place the blame for that on the oil spill. the fisherman goes on to describe how the oyster reefs off of louisiana have not been producing like they should since the spill. water pollution in the city of woburn massachusetts gained public recognition in the lawsuit filed by the families of children in woburn who had died from leukemia in unusually high numbers. the families attributed the leukemia to the town s polluted drinking water which had been contaminated over years of industry most notably the toxic compounds used by leather factories in the area. the martin county coal slurry spill occurred on october when a coal slurry broke into an abandoned mine and sent an estimated million gallons of slurry into the tug fork river. the spill polluted miles of the big sandy river and a water supply for over residents. on december a dike ruptured on the kingston fossil plant in roane county tennessee and released. billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry into the emory river. it was the largest fly ash release and worst coal ash related disaster in u. s. history. on august workers on the gold king mine in silverton colorado released million gallons of toxic wastewater when attempting to add a tap to the tailing pond for the mine. the wastewater carried unsafe levels of heavy metals with some parts of the river testing for hundreds of times over their limits. during the late century there was little federal government attention paid to what were considered to be local environmental and health problems. the only federal legislation to address water pollution during this era was the rivers and harbors act of. in the law congress prohibited the dumping of refuse debris that interfered with navigationbut other forms of pollution were not addressed. in to address oil spills in harbors congress passed the oil pollution act. the law provided for penalties in the event of oil spills but they were applicable only to vessels in coastal waters. in the s and s state water boards were created to monitor some aspects of water quality. even prior to the clean water act the united states public health service investigated reports of water borne disease. in the s the public health service tested drinking water quality at at public establishments in door county wisconsin having their own wells. the clean water act of was the first act of its kind to establish a broad regulatory framework for improving water quality in the united states. the cwa defines procedures for pollution control and developing criteria and standards for pollutants in surface water. the law authorizes the environmental protection agency to regulate surface water pollution in the united states in partnership with state agencies. prior to it was legal to discharge wastewater to surface waters without testing for or removing water pollutants. the cwa was amended in and to adjust the federal proportion of construction grant funding for local governments regulate municipal storm sewer discharges and to later establish the clean water state revolving fund. the fund provides low interest loans to improve municipal sewage treatment systems and finance other water quality improvements. under the cwa the national pollution discharge elimination system regulates permits for discharges into water bodies. the epa regulations require each facility to apply for a specific permit for its wastewater discharges and consequently require that each facility treat its wastewater. in addition to effluent limitations the permits include monitoring and reporting requirements which are used by epa and states to enforce the limitations. however over fifty percent of the rivers in the united states still violate pollution standards published by the states. cwa and npdes form the backbone of regulation for controlling surface water pollution in the united states. additional regulation exists on a state by state basis allowing for more stringent regulation for protected bodies of water. additional regulation may be enacted to limit pollution that comes from non point sources such as agriculture. in many watersheds non point sources are the principal cause of noncompliance with water quality standards. some economists questioned whether the law was delivering the promised results of cleaner rivers and lakes and whether benefits exceeded the costs to society. the united states government has spent over one trillion dollars trying to combat water pollution. in the cwa congress had declared that the nations waters were to be free of pollutants by only eleven years after enactment. in general water quality has improved nationwide since but not all pollution has been eliminated. between and there was a percent increase in the number of waterways that are safe for fishing. data supporting this finding is limited only percent of the united states waterways had been tested for contamination. categoriespollution is the introduction of contaminants into the natural environment that cause adverse change. pollution can take the form of chemical substances or energy such as noise heat or light. pollutants the components of pollution can be either foreign substances energies or naturally occurring contaminants. pollution is often classed as point source or nonpoint source pollution. in pollution killed million people worldwide. major forms of pollution include air pollution light pollution litter noise pollution plastic pollution soil contamination radioactive contamination thermal pollution visual pollution and water pollution. the major forms of pollution are listed below along with the particular contaminant relevant to each of them the major forms of pollution are also listed below in the pollution navigation box a pollutant is a waste material that pollutes air water or soil. three factors determine the severity of a pollutant its chemical nature the concentration the area affected and the persistence. air pollution comes from both natural and human made sources. however globally human made pollutants from combustion construction mining agriculture and warfare are increasingly significant in the air pollution equation. motor vehicle emissions are one of the leading causes of air pollution. china united states russia india mexico and japan are the world leaders in air pollution emissions. principal stationary pollution sources include chemical plants coal fired power plants oil refineries petrochemical plants nuclear waste disposal activity incinerators large livestock farms pvc factories metals production factories plastics factories and other heavy industry. agricultural air pollution comes from contemporary practices which include clear felling and burning of natural vegetation as well as spraying of pesticides and herbicidesabout million metric tons of hazardous wastes are generated each year. the united states alone produces about million metric tons. americans constitute less than of the worlds population but produce roughly of the worlds co and generate approximately of worlds waste. in china overtook the united states as the worlds biggest producer of co while still far behind based on per capita pollution. some of the more common soil contaminants are chlorinated hydrocarbons heavy metals mtbe zinc arsenic and benzene. in a series of press reports culminating in a book called fateful harvest unveiled a widespread practice of recycling industrial byproducts into fertilizer resulting in the contamination of the soil with various metals. ordinary municipal landfills are the source of many chemical substances entering the soil environment emanating from the wide variety of refuse accepted especially substances illegally discarded there or from pre landfills that may have been subject to little control in the u. s. or eu. there have also been some unusual releases of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins commonly called dioxins for simplicity such as tcdd. pollution can also be the consequence of a natural disaster. for example hurricanes often involve water contamination from sewage and petrochemical spills from ruptured boats or automobiles. larger scale and environmental damage is not uncommon when coastal oil rigs or refineries are involved. some sources of pollution such as nuclear power plants or oil tankers can produce widespread and potentially hazardous releases when accidents occur. in the case of noise pollution the dominant source class is the motor vehicle producing about ninety percent of all unwanted noise worldwide. carbon dioxide while vital for photosynthesis is sometimes referred to as pollution because raised levels of the gas in the atmosphere are affecting the earths climate. disruption of the environment can also highlight the connection between areas of pollution that would normally be classified separately such as those of water and air. recent studies have investigated the potential for long term rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide to cause slight but critical increases in the acidity of ocean waters and the possible effects of this on marine ecosystems. in february a report by the intergovernmental panel on climate change representing the work of scientists economists and policymakers from more than countries confirmed that humans have been the primary cause of global warming since. humans have ways to cut greenhouse gas emissions and avoid the consequences of global warming a major climate report concluded. but to change the climate the transition from fossil fuels like coal and oil needs to occur within decades according to the final report this year from the uns intergovernmental panel on climate change. adverse air quality can kill many organisms including humans. ozone pollution can cause respiratory disease cardiovascular disease throat inflammation chest pain and congestion. water pollution causes approximately deaths per day mostly due to contamination of drinking water by untreated sewage in developing countries. an estimated million indians have no access to a proper toilet over ten million people in india fell ill with waterborne illnesses in and people died most of them children. nearly million chinese lack access to safe drinking water. a analysis estimated that. million people died prematurely each year in china because of air pollution. the high smog levels china has been facing for a long time can do damage to civilians bodies and cause different diseases. the who estimated in that air pollution causes half a million deaths per year in india. studies have estimated that the number of people killed annually in the united states could be over. oil spills can cause skin irritations and rashes. noise pollution induces hearing loss high blood pressure stress and sleep disturbance. mercury has been linked to developmental deficits in children and neurologic symptoms. older people are majorly exposed to diseases induced by air pollution. those with heart or lung disorders are at additional risk. children and infants are also at serious risk. lead and other heavy metals have been shown to cause neurological problems. chemical and radioactive substances can cause cancer and as well as birth defects. an october study by the lancet commission on pollution and health found that global pollution specifically toxic air water soils and workplaces kills nine million people annually which is triple the number of deaths caused by aids tuberculosis and malaria combined and times higher than deaths caused by wars and other forms of human violence. the study concluded that pollution is one of the great existential challenges of the anthropocene era. pollution endangers the stability of the earth s support systems and threatens the continuing survival of human societies. pollution has been found to be present widely in the environment. there are a number of effects of this the toxicology and environmental health information program at the united states national library of medicine maintains a comprehensive toxicology and environmental health web site that includes access to resources produced by tehip and by other government agencies and organizations. this web site includes links to databases bibliographies tutorials and other scientific and consumer oriented resources. tehip also is responsible for the toxicology data network an integrated system of toxicology and environmental health databases that are available free of charge on the web. toxmap is a geographic information system that is part of toxnet. toxmap uses maps of the united states to help users visually explore data from the united states environmental protection agencys toxics release inventory and superfund basic research programs. a study found that exposure to pollution causes an increase in violent crime. a paper linked pollution to adverse school outcomes for children. a number of studies show that pollution has an adverse effect on the productivity of both indoor and outdoor workers. to protect the environment from the adverse effects of pollution many nations worldwide have enacted legislation to regulate various types of pollution as well as to mitigate the adverse effects of pollution. pollution control is a term used in environmental management. it means the control of emissions and effluents into air water or soil. without pollution control the waste products from overconsumption heating agriculture mining manufacturing transportation and other human activities whether they accumulate or disperse will degrade the environment. in the hierarchy of controls pollution prevention and waste minimization are more desirable than pollution control. in the field of land development low impact development is a similar technique for the prevention of urban runoff. pollution has a cost. manufacturing activities that cause air pollution impose health and clean up costs on the whole of society. a manufacturing activity that causes air pollution is an example of a negative externality in production. a negative externality in production occurs when a firm s production reduces the well being of others who are not compensated by the firm. for example if a laundry firm exists near a polluting steel manufacturing firm there will be increased costs for the laundry firm because of the dirt and smoke produced by the steel manufacturing firm. if external costs exist such as those created by pollution the manufacturer will choose to produce more of the product than would be produced if the manufacturer were required to pay all associated environmental costs. because responsibility or consequence for self directed action lies partly outside the self an element of externalization is involved. if there are external benefits such as in public safety less of the good may be produced than would be the case if the producer were to receive payment for the external benefits to others. however goods and services that involve negative externalities in production such as those that produce pollution tend to be over produced and underpriced since the externality is not being priced into the market. pollution can also create costs for the firms producing the pollution. sometimes firms choose or are forced by regulation to reduce the amount of pollution that they are producing. the associated costs of doing this are called abatement costs or marginal abatement costs if measured by each additional unit. in pollution abatement capital expenditures and operating costs in the us amounted to nearly billion. the pure earth an international non for profit organization dedicated to eliminating life threatening pollution in the developing world issues an annual list of some of the worlds most polluting industries. below is the list for a report by the institute for agriculture and trade policy and grain says that the meat and dairy industries are poised to surpass the oil industry as the worlds worst polluters. pure earth issues an annual list of some of the worlds worst polluted places. below is the list for society derives some indirect utility from pollution otherwise there would be no incentive to pollute. this utility comes from the consumption of goods and services that create pollution. therefore it is important that policymakers attempt to balance these indirect benefits with the costs of pollution in order to achieve an efficient outcome. it is possible to use environmental economics to determine which level of pollution is deemed the social optimum. for economists pollution is an external cost and occurs only when one or more individuals suffer a loss of welfare however there exists a socially optimal level of pollution at which welfare is maximized. this is because consumers derive utility from the good or service manufactured which will outweigh the social cost of pollution until a certain point. at this point the damage of one extra unit of pollution to society the marginal cost of pollution is exactly equal to the marginal benefit of consuming one more unit of the good or service. in markets with pollution or other negative externalities in production the free market equilibrium will not account for the costs of pollution on society. if the social costs of pollution are higher than the private costs incurred by the firm then the true supply curve will be higher. the point at which the social marginal cost and market demand intersect gives the socially optimal level of pollution. at this point the quantity will be lower and the price will be higher in comparison to the free market equilibrium. therefore the free market outcome could be considered a market failure because it does not maximize efficiency. this model can be used as a basis to evaluate different methods of internalizing the externality. some examples include tariffs a carbon tax and cap and trade systems. the earliest precursor of pollution generated by life forms would have been a natural function of their existence. the attendant consequences on viability and population levels fell within the sphere of natural selection. these would have included the demise of a population locally or ultimately species extinction. processes that were untenable would have resulted in a new balance brought about by changes and adaptations. at the extremes for any form of life consideration of pollution is superseded by that of survival. for humankind the factor of technology is a distinguishing and critical consideration both as an enabler and an additional source of byproducts. short of survival human concerns include the range from quality of life to health hazards. since science holds experimental demonstration to be definitive modern treatment of toxicity or environmental harm involves defining a level at which an effect is observable. common examples of fields where practical measurement is crucial include automobile emissions control industrial exposure pels toxicology and medicine. the solution to pollution is dilution is a dictum which summarizes a traditional approach to pollution management whereby sufficiently diluted pollution is not harmful. it is well suited to some other modern locally scoped applications such as laboratory safety procedure and hazardous material release emergency management. but it assumes that the diluent is in virtually unlimited supply for the application or that resulting dilutions are acceptable in all cases. such simple treatment for environmental pollution on a wider scale might have had greater merit in earlier centuries when physical survival was often the highest imperative human population and densities were lower technologies were simpler and their byproducts more benign. but these are often no longer the case. furthermore advances have enabled measurement of concentrations not possible before. the use of statistical methods in evaluating outcomes has given currency to the principle of probable harm in cases where assessment is warranted but resorting to deterministic models is impractical or infeasible. in addition consideration of the environment beyond direct impact on human beings has gained prominence. yet in the absence of a superseding principle this older approach predominates practices throughout the world. it is the basis by which to gauge concentrations of effluent for legal release exceeding which penalties are assessed or restrictions applied. one such superseding principle is contained in modern hazardous waste laws in developed countries as the process of diluting hazardous waste to make it non hazardous is usually a regulated treatment process. migration from pollution dilution to elimination in many cases can be confronted by challenging economical and technological barriers. air pollution has always accompanied civilizations. pollution started from prehistoric times when man created the first fires. according to a article in the journal science soot found on ceilings of prehistoric caves provides ample evidence of the high levels of pollution that was associated with inadequate ventilation of open fires. metal forging appears to be a key turning point in the creation of significant air pollution levels outside the home. core samples of glaciers in greenland indicate increases in pollution associated with greek roman and chinese metal production. the burning of coal and wood and the presence of many horses in concentrated areas made the cities the primary sources of pollution. king edward i of england banned the burning of sea coal by proclamation in london in after its smoke became a problem the fuel was so common in england that this earliest of names for it was acquired because it could be carted away from some shores by the wheelbarrow. it was the industrial revolution that gave birth to environmental pollution as we know it today. london also recorded one of the earlier extreme cases of water quality problems with the great stink on the thames of which led to construction of the london sewerage system soon afterward. pollution issues escalated as population growth far exceeded viability of neighborhoods to handle their waste problem. reformers began to demand sewer systems and clean water. in the sanitary conditions in berlin were among the worst in europe. august bebel recalled conditions before a modern sewer system was built in the late s waste water from the houses collected in the gutters running alongside the curbs and emitted a truly fearsome smell. there were no public toilets in the streets or squares. visitors especially women often became desperate when nature called. in the public buildings the sanitary facilities were unbelievably primitive.... as a metropolis berlin did not emerge from a state of barbarism into civilization until after. the primitive conditions were intolerable for a world national capital and the imperial german government brought in its scientists engineers and urban planners to not only solve the deficiencies but to forge berlin as the worlds model city. a british expert in concluded that berlin represented the most complete application of science order and method of public life adding it is a marvel of civic administration the most modern and most perfectly organized city that there is. the emergence of great factories and consumption of immense quantities of coal gave rise to unprecedented air pollution and the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste. chicago and cincinnati were the first two american cities to enact laws ensuring cleaner air in. pollution became a major issue in the united states in the early twentieth century as progressive reformers took issue with air pollution caused by coal burning water pollution caused by bad sanitation and street pollution caused by the million horses who worked in american cities in generating large quantities of urine and manure. as historian martin melosi notes the generation that first saw automobiles replacing the horses saw cars as miracles of cleanliness. by the s however automobile caused smog was a major issue in los angeles. other cities followed around the country until early in the century when the short lived office of air pollution was created under the department of the interior. extreme smog events were experienced by the cities of los angeles and donora pennsylvania in the late s serving as another public reminder. air pollution would continue to be a problem in england especially later during the industrial revolution and extending into the recent past with the great smog of. awareness of atmospheric pollution spread widely after world war ii with fears triggered by reports of radioactive fallout from atomic warfare and testing. then a non nuclear event the great smog of in london killed at least people. this prompted some of the first major modern environmental legislation the clean air act of. pollution began to draw major public attention in the united states between the mid s and early s when congress passed the noise control act the clean air act the clean water act and the national environmental policy act. severe incidents of pollution helped increase consciousness. pcb dumping in the hudson river resulted in a ban by the epa on consumption of its fish in. national news stories in the late s especially the long term dioxin contamination at love canal starting in and uncontrolled dumping in valley of the drums led to the superfund legislation of. the pollution of industrial land gave rise to the name brownfield a term now common in city planning. the development of nuclear science introduced radioactive contamination which can remain lethally radioactive for hundreds of thousands of years. lake karachay named by the worldwatch institute as the most polluted spot on earth served as a disposal site for the soviet union throughout the s and s. chelyabinsk russia is considered the most polluted place on the planet. nuclear weapons continued to be tested in the cold war especially in the earlier stages of their development. the toll on the worst affected populations and the growth since then in understanding about the critical threat to human health posed by radioactivity has also been a prohibitive complication associated with nuclear power. though extreme care is practiced in that industry the potential for disaster suggested by incidents such as those at three mile island chernobyl and fukushima pose a lingering specter of public mistrust. worldwide publicity has been intense on those disasters. widespread support for test ban treaties has ended almost all nuclear testing in the atmosphere. international catastrophes such as the wreck of the amoco cadiz oil tanker off the coast of brittany in and the bhopal disaster in have demonstrated the universality of such events and the scale on which efforts to address them needed to engage. the borderless nature of atmosphere and oceans inevitably resulted in the implication of pollution on a planetary level with the issue of global warming. most recently the term persistent organic pollutant has come to describe a group of chemicals such as pbdes and pfcs among others. though their effects remain somewhat less well understood owing to a lack of experimental data they have been detected in various ecological habitats far removed from industrial activity such as the arctic demonstrating diffusion and bioaccumulation after only a relatively brief period of widespread use. a much more recently discovered problem is the great pacific garbage patch a huge concentration of plastics chemical sludge and other debris which has been collected into a large area of the pacific ocean by the north pacific gyre. this is a less well known pollution problem than the others described above but nonetheless has multiple and serious consequences such as increasing wildlife mortality the spread of invasive species and human ingestion of toxic chemicals. organizations such as gyres have researched the pollution and along with artists like marina debris are working toward publicizing the issue. pollution introduced by light at night is becoming a global problem more severe in urban centres but nonetheless contaminating also large territories far away from towns. growing evidence of local and global pollution and an increasingly informed public over time have given rise to environmentalism and the environmental movement which generally seek to limit human impact on the environment. air pollutionsoil contaminationwater pollutionotherplastic pollution in ghana plastic pollution on the remote island of maui hawaiicategoriesplastic pollution is the accumulation of plastic objects and particles in the earths environment that adversely affects wildlife wildlife habitat and humans. plastics that act as pollutants are categorized by size into micro meso or macro debris. plastics are inexpensive and durable making them very adaptable for different uses as a result humans produce a lot of plastic. however the chemical structure of most plastics renders them resistant to many natural processes of degradation and as a result they are slow to degrade. together these two factors allow large volumes of plastic to enter the environment as mismanaged waste and for it to persist in the ecosystem. plastic pollution can afflict land waterways and oceans. it is estimated that. to. million tonnes of plastic waste enters the ocean from coastal communities each year. it is estimated that there is a stock of million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of with an assumption that. of global plastics produced from to has entered the ocean and has accumulated there. some researchers suggest that by there could be more plastic than fish in the oceans by weight. living organisms particularly marine animals can be harmed either by mechanical effects such as entanglement in plastic objects problems related to ingestion of plastic waste or through exposure to chemicals within plastics that interfere with their physiology. degraded plastic waste can directly affect humans through both direct consumption indirect consumption and disruption of various hormonal mechanisms. as of million tonnes of plastic is produced each year in asia where china is the worlds largest producer. from the s up to an estimated. billion tonnes of plastic has been produced worldwide of which an estimated has been recycled and another has been incinerated. this large amount of plastic waste enters the environment with studies suggesting that the bodies of of seabirds contain plastic debris. in some areas there have been significant efforts to reduce the prominence of free range plastic pollution through reducing plastic consumption litter cleanup and promoting plastic recycling. as of the global mass of produced plastic exceeds the biomass of all land and marine animals combined. a may amendment to the basel convention regulates the exportation importation of plastic waste largely intended to prevent the shipping of plastic waste from developed countries to developing countries. nearly all countries have joined this agreement. the trade in plastic waste has been identified as a main culprit of marine litter. countries importing the waste plastics often lack the capacity to process all the material. as a result the united nations has imposed a ban on waste plastic trade unless it meets certain criteria. there are three major forms of plastic that contribute to plastic pollution micro macro and mega plastics. mega and micro plastics have accumulated in highest densities in the northern hemisphere concentrated around urban centers and water fronts. plastic can be found off the coast of some islands because of currents carrying the debris. both mega and macro plastics are found in packaging footwear and other domestic items that have been washed off of ships or discarded in landfills. fishing related items are more likely to be found around remote islands. these may also be referred to as micro meso and macro debris. plastic debris is categorized as either primary or secondary. primary plastics are in their original form when collected. examples of these would be bottle caps cigarette butts and microbeads. secondary plastics on the other hand account for smaller plastics that have resulted from the degradation of primary plastics. microdebris are plastic pieces between mm and mm in size. plastic debris that starts off as meso or macrodebris can become microdebris through degradation and collisions that break it down into smaller pieces. microdebris is more commonly referred to as nurdles. nurdles are recycled to make new plastic items but they easily end up released into the environment during production because of their small size. they often end up in ocean waters through rivers and streams. microdebris that come from cleaning and cosmetic products are also referred to as scrubbers. because microdebris and scrubbers are so small in size filter feeding organisms often consume them. nurdles enter the ocean by means of spills during transportation or from land based sources. the ocean conservancy reported that china indonesia philippines thailand and vietnam dump more plastic in the sea than all other countries combined. it is estimated that of the plastics in the ocean are nurdles making them one of the most common types of plastic pollution along with plastic bags and food containers. these micro plastics can accumulate in the oceans and allow for the accumulation of persistent bio accumulating toxins such as bisphenol a polystyrene ddt and pcbs which are hydrophobic in nature and can cause adverse health affects. a study by richard thompson from the university of plymouth uk found a great amount of microdebris on the beaches and waters in europe the americas australia africa and antarctica. thompson and his associates found that plastic pellets from both domestic and industrial sources were being broken down into much smaller plastic pieces some having a diameter smaller than human hair. if not ingested this microdebris floats instead of being absorbed into the marine environment. thompson predicts there may be plastic items per square kilometre of sea surface and plastic particles per square kilometre of seabed. international pellet watch collected samples of polythene pellets from beaches from countries which were then analysed for organic micro pollutants. it was found that pellets found on beaches in the u. s. vietnam and southern africa contained compounds from pesticides suggesting a high use of pesticides in the areas. in scientists created what may be the first scientific estimate of how much microplastic currently resides in earths seafloor after investigating six areas of km depth km off the australian coast. they found the highly variable microplastic counts to be proportionate to plastic on the surface and the angle of the seafloor slope. by averaging the microplastic mass per cm they estimated that earths seafloor contains million tons of microplastic about double the amount they estimated based on data from earlier studies despite calling both estimates conservative as coastal areas are known to contain much more microplastic. these estimates are about one to two times the amount of plastic thought per jambeck et al. to currently enter the oceans annually. plastic debris is categorized as macrodebris when it is larger than mm. these include items such as plastic grocery bags. macrodebris are often found in ocean waters and can have a serious impact on the native organisms. fishing nets have been prime pollutants. even after they have been abandoned they continue to trap marine organisms and other plastic debris. eventually these abandoned nets become too difficult to remove from the water because they become too heavy having grown in weight up to tonnes. plastics themselves contribute to approximately of discarded waste. many kinds of plastics exist depending on their precursors and the method for their polymerization. depending on their chemical composition plastics and resins have varying properties related to contaminant absorption and adsorption. polymer degradation takes much longer as a result of saline environments and the cooling effect of the sea. these factors contribute to the persistence of plastic debris in certain environments. recent studies have shown that plastics in the ocean decompose faster than was once thought due to exposure to sun rain and other environmental conditions resulting in the release of toxic chemicals such as bisphenol a. however due to the increased volume of plastics in the ocean decomposition has slowed down. the marine conservancy has predicted the decomposition rates of several plastic products. it is estimated that a foam plastic cup will take years a plastic beverage holder will take years a disposable nappy will take years and fishing line will take years to degrade. it was estimated that global production of plastics is approximately mt yr. their abundance has been found to transport persistent organic pollutants also known as pops. these pollutants have been linked to an increased distribution of algae associated with red tides. in the group break free from plastic organized over volunteers in countries to collect and identify plastic waste. these volunteers collected over plastic bags sachets and plastic bottles as reported by the guardian. nearly half of the items were identifiable by consumer brands. the most common brands were coca cola nestl and pepsico. according to the global campaign coordinator for the project emma priestland in the only way to solve the problem is stopping production of single use plastic and using reusable products instead. china is the biggest consumer of single use plastics. coca cola answered that more than of our portfolio comes in refillable or fountain packaging they are decreasing the amount of plastic in secondary packaging. nestl responded that of their packaging and of their plastic packaging can be reused or recycled and by they want to make it. by that year they want to reduce the consumption of virgin plastic by one third. pepsico responded that they want to decrease virgin plastic in our beverage business by by and also expanding reuse and refill practices what should prevent billion single use bottles by. top mismanaged plastic waste pollutersin approximate million tonnes of plastics wind up in the oceans every year out of which the is from the following countries china is the most mismanaged plastic waste polluter leaving in the sea the. of the world total second indonesia with the. third philippines with. fourth vietnam with. fifth sri lanka. sixth thailand with. seventh egypt with. eighth malaysia with. ninth nigeria with. tenth bangladesh with. eleventh south africa with. twelfth india with. thirteenth algeria with. fourteenth turkey with. fifteenth pakistan with. sixteenth brazil with. seventeenth myanmar with. eighteenth morocco with. nineteenth north korea with. twentieth united states with.. the rest of worlds countries combined wind up the. of the mismanaged plastic waste in the oceans according to a study published by science jambeck et al. in a new study revised the potential u. s. contribution to mismanaged plastic. it estimated an annual.. metric tons was mismanaged in the countries to which the u. s. exported plastics for recycling and an. and. metric tons was illegally dumped in the u. s. itself. thus the amount of u. s. generated plastic estimated to enter the ocean environment could range as high as. mt placing the u. s. behind indonesia and india in oceanic pollution or as low as. mt placing the u. s. behind indonesia india thailand china brazil philippines egypt japan russia and vietnam. the authors noted that sincehina ceased importing plastics for recycling and since international treaties restricted the export of plastics for recycling. all the european union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list. a study calculated the mismanaged plastic waste in millions of metric tonnes per year around million tonnes of plastic waste is generated each year around the world between. million and. million tonnes is dumped into the sea. about of the plastic waste in the ocean comes from the following top countries. the table below list the top plastic waste polluting countries in according to a study published by science jambeck et al. all the european union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list. in a study published by environmental science technology schmidt et al calculated that rivers two in africa and eight in asia transport of the global plastics load into the sea.. the caribbean islands are the biggest plastic polluters per capita in the world. trinidad and tobago produces. kilograms of waste per capita per day is the biggest plastic polluter per capita in the world. at least. kg per person per day of trinidad and tobagos plastic debris end up in the ocean or for example saint lucia which generates more than four times the amount of plastic waste per capita as china and is responsible for. times more improperly disposed plastic waste per capita than china. of the top thirty global polluters per capita ten are from the caribbean region. these are trinidad and tobago antigua and barbuda saint kitts and nevis guyana barbados saint lucia bahamas grenada anguilla and aruba according to a set of studies summarized by forbes. the distribution of plastic debris is highly variable as a result of certain factors such as wind and ocean currents coastline geography urban areas and trade routes. human population in certain areas also plays a large role in this. plastics are more likely to be found in enclosed regions such as the caribbean. it serves as a means of distribution of organisms to remote coasts that are not their native environments. this could potentially increase the variability and dispersal of organisms in specific areas that are less biologically diverse. plastics can also be used as vectors for chemical contaminants such as persistent organic pollutants and heavy metals. in a new report plastic and climate was published. according to the report in production and incineration of plastic will contribute greenhouse gases in the equivalent of million tonnes of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. in current trend annual emissions from these sources will grow to. billion tonnes by. by plastic could emit billion tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions as much as percent of the earths remaining carbon budget. by it will emit billion tonnes more than half of the carbon budget. those are emission from production transportation incineration but there are also releases of methane and effects on phytoplankton. plastic pollution on land poses a threat to the plants and animals including humans who are based on the land. estimates of the amount of plastic concentration on land are between four and twenty three times that of the ocean. the amount of plastic poised on the land is greater and more concentrated than that in the water. mismanaged plastic waste ranges from percent in east asia and pacific to one percent in north america. the percentage of mismanaged plastic waste reaching the ocean annually and thus becoming plastic marine debris is between one third and one half the total mismanaged waste for that year. chlorinated plastic can release harmful chemicals into the surrounding soil which can then seep into groundwater or other surrounding water sources and also the ecosystem of the world. this can cause serious harm to the species that drink the water. a study found that of tap water samples taken around the world contained plastic pollutants. this was the first study to focus on global drinking water pollution with plastics and showed that with a contamination rate of tap water in the united states was the most polluted followed by lebanon and india. european countries such as the united kingdom germany and france had the lowest contamination rate though still as high as. this means that people may be ingesting between and microparticles of plastic from tap water per year. the analysis found particles of more than. microns in size which is times bigger than a nanometer. it is currently unclear if this contamination is affecting human health but if the water is also found to contain nano particle pollutants there could be adverse impacts on human well being according to scientists associated with the study. however plastic tap water pollution remains under studied as are the links of how pollution transfers between humans air water and soil. plastic waste can clog storm drains and such clogging can increase flood damage particularly in urban areas. for example in bangkok flood risk increases substantially because of plastic waste clogging the already overburdened sewer system. marine plastic pollution is a type of marine pollution by plastics ranging in size from large original material such as bottles and bags down to microplastics formed from the fragmentation of plastic material. marine debris is mainly discarded human rubbish which floats on or is suspended in the ocean. eighty percent of marine debris is plastic. microplastics and nanoplastics result from the breakdown or photodegradation of plastic waste in surface waters rivers or oceans. it is estimated that there is a stock of million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of assuming that. of global plastics produced from to has entered the ocean and has accumulated there. the united nations ocean conference estimated that the oceans might contain more weight in plastics than fish by the yearompounds that are used in manufacturing pollute the environment by releasing chemicals into the air and water. some compounds that are used in plastics such as phthalates bisphenol a polybrominated diphenyl ether are under close statute and might be very hurtful. even though these compounds are unsafe they have been used in the manufacturing of food packaging medical devices flooring materials bottles perfumes cosmetics and much more. the large dosage of these compounds are hazardous to humans destroying the endocrine system. bra imitates the females hormone called estrogen. pbd destroys and causes damage to thyroid hormones which are vital hormone glands that play a major role in the metabolism growth and development of the human body. although the level of exposure to these chemicals varies depending on age and geography most humans experience simultaneous exposure to many of these chemicals. average levels of daily exposure are below the levels deemed to be unsafe but more research needs to be done on the effects of low dose exposure on humans. a lot is unknown on how severely humans are physically affected by these chemicals. some of the chemicals used in plastic production can cause dermatitis upon contact with human skin. in many plastics these toxic chemicals are only used in trace amounts but significant testing is often required to ensure that the toxic elements are contained within the plastic by inert material or polymer. children and women during their reproduction age are at most at risk and more prone to damaging their immune as well as their reproductive system from these hormone disrupting chemicals. it can also affect humans because it may create an eyesore that interferes with enjoyment of the natural environment. due to the pervasiveness of plastic products most of the human population is constantly exposed to the chemical components of plastics. of adults in the united states have had detectable levels of bpa in their urine. exposure to chemicals such as bpa have been correlated with disruptions in fertility reproduction sexual maturation and other health effects. specific phthalates have also resulted in similar biological effects. bisphenol a affects gene expression related to the thyroid hormone axis which affects biological functions such as metabolism and development. bpa can decrease thyroid hormone receptor activity by increasing tr transcriptional corepressor activity. this then decreases the level of thyroid hormone binding proteins that bind to triiodothyronine. by affecting the thyroid hormone axis bpa exposure can lead to hypothyroidism. bpa can disrupt normal physiological levels of sex hormones. it does this by binding to globulins that normally bind to sex hormones such as androgens and estrogens leading to the disruption of the balance between the two. bpa can also affect the metabolism or the catabolism of sex hormones. it often acts as an antiandrogen or as an estrogen which can cause disruptions in gonadal development and sperm production. efforts to reduce the use of plastics to promote plastic recycling and to reduce mismanaged plastic waste or plastic pollution have occurred or are ongoing. the first scientific review in the professional academic literature about global plastic pollution in general found that the rational response to the global threat would be reductions in consumption of virgin plastic materials along with internationally coordinated strategies for waste management such as banning export of plastic waste unless it leads to better recycling and describes the state of knowledge about poorly reversible impacts which are one of the rationales for its reduction. some supermarkets charge their customers for plastic bags and in some places more efficient reusable or biodegradable materials are being used in place of plastics. some communities and businesses have put a ban on some commonly used plastic items such as bottled water and plastic bags. some non governmental organizations have launched voluntary plastic reduction schemes like certificates that can be adapted by restaurants to be recognized as eco friendly among customers. in january a global alliance to end plastic waste was created by companies in the plastics industry. the alliance aims to clean the environment from existing waste and increase recycling but it does not mention reduction in plastic production as one of its targets. the use of biodegradable plastics has many advantages and disadvantages. biodegradables are biopolymers that degrade in industrial composters. biodegradables do not degrade as efficiently in domestic composters and during this slower process methane gas may be emitted. there are also other types of degradable materials that are not considered to be biopolymers because they are oil based similar to other conventional plastics. these plastics are made to be more degradable through the use of different additives which help them degrade when exposed to uv rays or other physical stressors. yet biodegradation promoting additives for polymers have been shown not to significantly increase biodegradation. although biodegradable and degradable plastics have helped reduce plastic pollution there are some drawbacks. one issue concerning both types of plastics is that they do not break down very efficiently in natural environments. there degradable plastics that are oil based may break down into smaller fractions at which point they do not degrade further. a parliamentary committee in the united kingdom also found that compostable and biodegradable plastics could add to marine pollution because there is a lack of infrastructure to deal with these new types of plastic as well as a lack of understanding about them on the part of consumers. for example these plastics need to be sent to industrial composting facilities to degrade properly but no adequate system exists to make sure waste reaches these facilities. the committee thus recommended to reduce the amount of plastic used rather than introducing new types of it to the market. up to of used plastic medical equipment is incinerated rather than deposited in a landfill as a precautionary measure to lessen the transmission of disease. this has allowed for a large decrease in the amount of plastic waste that stems from medical equipment. at a large scale plastics paper and other materials provides waste to energy plants with useful fuel. about of total produced plastic has been incinerated. many studies have been done concerning the gaseous emissions that result from the incineration process. incinerated plastics release a number of toxins in the burning process including dioxins furans mercury and polychlorinated biphenyls. when burned outside of facilities designed to collect or process the toxins this can have significant health effects and create significant air pollution. agencies such as the us environmental protection agency and us food and drug administration often do not assess the safety of new chemicals until after a negative side effect is shown. once they suspect a chemical may be toxic it is studied to determine the human reference dose which is determined to be the lowest observable adverse effect level. during these studies a high dose is tested to see if it causes any adverse health effects and if it does not lower doses are considered to be safe as well. this does not take into account the fact that with some chemicals found in plastics such as bpa lower doses can have a discernible effect. even with this often complex evaluation process policies have been put into place in order to help alleviate plastic pollution and its effects. government regulations have been implemented that ban some chemicals from being used in specific plastic products. in canada the united states and the european union bpa has been banned from being incorporated in the production of baby bottles and childrens cups due to health concerns and the higher vulnerability of younger children to the effects of bpa. taxes have been established in order to discourage specific ways of managing plastic waste. the landfill tax for example creates an incentive to choose to recycle plastics rather than contain them in landfills by making the latter more expensive. there has also been a standardization of the types of plastics that can be considered compostable. the european norm en which was set by the european committee for standardization lists the standards that plastics must meet in terms of compostability and biodegradability in order to officially be labeled as compostable. given the significant threat that oceans face the european investment bank group aims to increase its funding and advisory assistance for ocean cleanup. for example the clean oceans initiative was established in. the european investment bank the german development bank and the french development agency agreed to invest a total of billion under the coi from october to october in initiatives aimed at reducing pollution discharge into the oceans with a special focus on plastics. major plastic producers continue to lobby governments to refrain from imposing restrictions on plastic production and to advocate for voluntary corporate targets to reduce new plastic output. however the worlds top plastic producers including the coca cola company nestle sa and pepsico have been failing to meet even their own minimum targets for virgin plastic use. there have been several international covenants which address marine plastic pollution such as the convention on the prevention of marine pollution by dumping of wastes and other matter the international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships and the honolulu strategy there is nothing around plastics which infiltrate the ocean from the land. in countries agreed to limit the amount of plastic waste that rich countries export to poorer countries using rules from the basel convention. however during january the first month that the agreement was in effect trade data showed that overall scrap exports actually increased. some academics and ngos believe that a legally binding international treaty to deal with plastic pollution is necessary. they think this because plastic pollution is an international problem moving between maritime borders and also because they believe there needs to be a cap on plastic production. lobbyists were hoping that unea would lead to a plastics treaty but the session ended without a legally binding agreement. the canadian federal government formed a current institution that protects marine areas this includes the mitigation of plastic pollution. in canada adopted legislation for oceans management and passed the oceans act. federal governance regional governance and aboriginal peoples are the actors involved in the process of decision making and implementation of the decision. the regional governance bodies are federal provincial and territorial government agencies that hold responsibilities of the marine environment. aboriginal peoples in canada have treaty and non treaty rights related to ocean activities. according to the canadian government they respect these rights and work with aboriginal groups in oceans management activities. with the oceans act made legal canada made a commitment to conserve and protect the oceans. the ocean acts underlying principle is sustainable development precautionary and integrated management approach to ensure that there is a comprehensive understanding in protecting marine areas. in the integrated management approach the oceans act designates federal responsibility to the minister of fisheries and oceans canada for any new and emerging ocean related activities. the act encourages collaboration and coordination within the government that unifies interested parties. moreover the oceans act engages any canadians who are interested in being informed of the decision making regarding ocean environment. in federal organizations developed the federal marine protected areas strategy. this strategy is a collaborative approach implemented by fisheries and oceans canada parks canada and environment canada to plan and manage federal marine protected areas. the federal marine protected areas work with aboriginal groups industries academia environmental groups and ngos to strengthen marine protected areas. the federal marine protected areas network consists of three core programs marine protected areas marine wildlife areas and national marine conservation areas. the mpa is a program to be noted because it is significant in protecting ecosystems from the effects of industrial activities. the mpa guiding principles are integrated management ecosystem based management approach adaptive management approach precautionary principle and flexible management approach. all five guiding principles are used collectively and simultaneously to collaborate and respect legislative mandates of individual departments to use scientific knowledge and traditional ecological knowledge to manage human activities to monitor and report on programs to meet conservation objectives of mpas to use best available information in the absence of scientific certainty and to maintain a balance between conservation needs and sustainable development objectives. inanadas government officially recognize plastic as toxic material what creates the possibility to limit its consumption in different ways. the two common forms of waste collection include curbside collection and the use of drop off recycling centers. about percent of the population in the united states have access to curbside and drop off recycling centers. in curbside collection which is available to about percent of the united states population people place designated plastics in a special bin to be picked up by a public or private hauling company. most curbside programs collect more than one type of plastic resin usually both pete and hdpe. at drop off recycling centers which are available to percent of the united states population people take their recyclables to a centrally located facility. once collected the plastics are delivered to a materials recovery facility or handler for sorting into single resin streams to increase product value. the sorted plastics are then baled to reduce shipping costs to reclaimers. there are varying rates of recycling per type of plastic and in the overall plastic recycling rate was approximately. in the united states. approximately. million tonnes of plastics were recycled in the u. s. in while. million tonnes plastic were dumped in landfills the same year. some plastics are recycled more than others in about. percent of hdpe bottles and. percent of pet bottles and jars were recycled. in may a new service model called loop to collect packaging from consumers and reuse it began to function in the new york region us. consumers drop packages in special shipping totes and then a pick up collect them. partners include procter gamble nestl pepsico unilever mars petcare the clorox company the body shop coca cola mondelz danone and other firms. it has begun with several thousand households but there are on the waiting list. the target of the service is not only stop single use plastic but to stop single use generally by recycling consumer product containers of various materials. the organization the ocean cleanup is trying to collect plastic waste from the oceans by nets. there are concerns from harm to some forms of sea organisms especially neuston. in the european union adopted a directive requiring a reduction in the consumption of single use plastic bags per person to by the year and to by the year. in april the eu adopted a further directive banning almost all types of single use plastic except bottles from the beginning of the yearhina is the biggest consumer of single use plastics. inhina published a plan to cut of plastic waste in years. as part of this plan single use plastic bags and straws will be bannedthe government of india decided to ban single use plastics and take a number of measures to recycle and reuse plastic from october the ministry of drinking water and sanitation government of india has requested various governmental departments to avoid the use of plastic bottles to provide drinking water during governmental meetings etc. and to instead make arrangements for providing drinking water that do not generate plastic waste. the state of sikkim has restricted the usage of plastic water bottles and styrofoam products. the state of bihar has banned the usage of plastic water bottles in governmental meetings. the national games of india organised in thiruvananthapuram was associated with green protocols. this was initiated by suchitwa mission that aimed for zero waste venues. to make the event disposable free there was ban on the usage of disposable water bottles. the event witnessed the usage of reusable tableware and stainless steel tumblers. athletes were provided with refillable steel flasks. it is estimated that these green practices stopped the generation of tonnes of disposable waste. the city of bangalore in banned the plastic for all purpose other than for few special cases like milk delivery etc. the state of maharashtra india effected the maharashtra plastic and thermocol products ban june subjecting plastic users to fines and potential imprisonment for repeat offenders. in july albania became the first country in europe to ban lightweight plastic bags. albanias environment minister blendi klosi said that businesses importing producing or trading plastic bags less than microns in thickness risk facing fines between million to. million lek. in bali a pair of two sisters melati and isabel wijsen have gone through efforts to ban plastic bags in. their organization bye bye plastic bags has spread to locations around the world. in washington university in st. louis became the first university in the united states to ban the sale of plastic single use water bottles. in district of columbia required all businesses that sell food or alcohol to charge an additional cents for each carryout plastic or paper bag. in and kauai maui and hawaii prohibit non biodegradable plastic bags at checkout as well as paper bags containing less than percent recycled material. in honolulu was the last major county approving the ban. in california prohibited large stores from providing plastic bags and if so a charge of. per bag and has to meet certain criteria. in illinois adopted the legislation and established recycle thin film friday in effort toe reclaim used thin film plastic bags and encourage reusable bags. in the new york banned single use plastic bags and introduced a cent fee for using single use paper bags. the ban will enter into force in. this will not only reduce plastic bag usage in new york state but also eliminate million barrels of oil used to make plastic bags used by the state each year. the state of maine ban styrofoam containers in may. in the giant eagle retailer became the first big us retailer that committed to completely phase out plastic by. the first step stop using single use plastic bags will begun to be implemented already on january. in delaware maine oregon and vermont enacted on legislation. vermont also restricted single use straws and polystyrene containers. in connecticut imposed a. charge on single use plastic bags at point of sale and is going to ban them on july. in the house of representatives of nigeria banned the production import and usage of plastic bags in the country. in israel cities eilat and herzliya decided to ban the usage of single use plastic bags and cutlery on the beaches. in tel aviv joined them banning also the sale of single use plastic on the beaches. in january the iceland supermarket chain which specializes in frozen foods pledged to eliminate or drastically reduce all plastic packaging for its store brand products by. as of communities achieved the title of plastic free community in united kingdom want to achieve it. after schoolgirls ella and caitlin launched a petition about it burger king and mcdonalds in the united kingdom and ireland pledged to stop sending plastic toys with their meals. mcdonalds pledged to do it from the year. mcdonalds also pledged to use a paper wrap for it meals and books that will be sent with the meals. the transmission will begin already in march. kenyain august kenya has one of the worlds harshest plastic bag bans. fines of or up to four years in jail to anyone that was caught producing selling or using a plastic bag. vanuatuon july vanuatu s independence day made an announcement of stepping towards the beginning of not using plastic bags and bottles. making it one of the first pacific nations to do so and will start banning the importation of single use plastic bottles and bags. taiwanin february taiwan restricted the use of single use plastic cups straws utensils and bags the ban will also include an extra charge for plastic bags and updates their recycling regulations and aiming by it would be completely enforced. the country announced a ban on many types of hard to recycle single use plastic by the ten corporations that produce the most plastic on the planet the coca cola company colgate palmolive danone mars incorporated mondelz international nestl pepsico perfetti van melle procter gamble and unilever formed a well financed network that has sabotaged for decades government and community efforts to address the plastic pollution crisis according to a detailed investigative report by the changing markets foundation. the investigation documents how these companies delay and derail legislation so that they can continue to inundate consumers with disposable plastic packaging. these large plastic producers have exploited public fears of the covid pandemic to work toward delaying and reversing existing regulation of plastic disposal. big ten plastic producers have advanced voluntary commitments for plastic waste disposal as a stratagem to deter governments from imposing additional regulations. as early as the early s petrochemical industry leaders understood that the vast majority of plastic they produced would never be recycled. for example an april report written by industry scientists for industry executive states that sorting the hundreds of different kinds plastic is infeasible and cost prohibitive. by the late s industry leaders also knew that the public must be kept feeling good about purchasing plastic products if their industry was to continue to prosper and needed to quell proposed legislation to regulate the plastic being sold. so the industry launched a million year corporate propaganda campaign targeting the american public with the message that plastic can be and is being recycled and lobbied american municipalities to launch expensive plastic waste collection programs and lobbied u. s. states to require the labeling of plastic products and containers with recycling symbols. they were confident however that the recycling initiatives would not end up recovering and reusing plastic in amounts anywhere near sufficient to hurt their profits in selling new virgin plastic products because they understood that the recycling efforts that they were promoting were likely to fail. industry leaders more recently have planned recycling of the plastic they produce by calling for more efficient collection sorting and processing. in the earth day network partnered with keep america beautiful and national cleanup day for the inaugural nationwide earth day cleanup. cleanups were held in all states five us territories sites and had more than volunteers. earth day is the anniversary of earth day. celebrations will include activities such as the great global cleanup citizen science advocacy education and art. this earth day aims to educate and mobilize more than one billion people to grow and support the next generation of environmental activists with a major focus on plastic wasteevery year june is observed as world environment day to raise awareness and increase government action on the pressing issue. in india was host to the world environment day and the theme was beat plastic pollution with a focus on single use or disposable plastic. the ministry of environment forest and climate change of india invited people to take care of their social responsibility and urged them to take up green good deeds in everyday life. several states presented plans to ban plastic or drastically reduce their use. on april in order to create awareness artist maria cristina finucci founded the garbage patch state at unesco headquarters in paris france in front of director general irina bokova. this was the first of a series of events under the patronage of unesco and of the italian ministry of the environment. categoriessoil contamination soil pollution or land pollution as a part of land degradation is caused by the presence of xenobiotic chemicals or other alteration in the natural soil environment. it is typically caused by industrial activity agricultural chemicals or improper disposal of waste. the most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons pyrene solvents pesticides lead and other heavy metals. contamination is correlated with the degree of industrialization and intensity of chemical substance. the concern over soil contamination stems primarily from health risks from direct contact with the contaminated soil vapour from the contaminants or from secondary contamination of water supplies within and underlying the soil. mapping of contaminated soil sites and the resulting cleanups are time consuming and expensive tasks requiring extensive amounts of geology hydrology chemistry computer modeling skills and gis in environmental contamination as well as an appreciation of the history of industrial chemistry. in north america and western europe the extent of contaminated land is best known with many of countries in these areas having a legal framework to identify and deal with this environmental problem. developing countries tend to be less tightly regulated despite some of them having undergone significant industrialization. soil pollution can be caused by the following the most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons solvents pesticides lead and other heavy metals. any activity that leads to other forms of soil degradation may indirectly worsen the contamination effects in that soil remediation becomes more tedious. historical deposition of coal ash used for residential commercial and industrial heating as well as for industrial processes such as ore smelting were a common source of contamination in areas that were industrialized before about. coal naturally concentrates lead and zinc during its formation as well as other heavy metals to a lesser degree. when the coal is burned most of these metals become concentrated in the ash. coal ash and slag may contain sufficient lead to qualify as a characteristic hazardous waste defined in the us as containing more than mg l of extractable lead using the tclp procedure. in addition to lead coal ash typically contains variable but significant concentrations of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons anthracene benzofluoranthene benzofluoranthene benzopyrene indenopyrene phenanthrene anthracene and others. these pahs are known human carcinogens and the acceptable concentrations of them in soil are typically around mg kg. coal ash and slag can be recognised by the presence of off white grains in soil gray heterogeneous soil or bubbly vesicular pebble sized grains. treated sewage sludge known in the industry as biosolids has become controversial as a fertilizer. as it is the byproduct of sewage treatment it generally contains more contaminants such as organisms pesticides and heavy metals than other soil. in the european union the urban waste water treatment directive allows sewage sludge to be sprayed onto land. the volume is expected to double to tons of dry solids in. this has good agricultural properties due to the high nitrogen and phosphate content. in wet weight was sprayed onto. of the land however this is expected to rise fold by. advocates say there is a need to control this so that pathogenic microorganisms do not get into water courses and to ensure that there is no accumulation of heavy metals in the top soil. a pesticide is a substance used to kill a pest. a pesticide may be a chemical substance biological agent antimicrobial disinfectant or device used against any pest. pests include insects plant pathogens weeds mollusks birds mammals fish nematodes and microbes that compete with humans for food destroy property spread or are a vector for disease or cause a nuisance. although there are benefits to the use of pesticides there are also drawbacks such as potential toxicity to humans and other organisms. herbicides are used to kill weeds especially on pavements and railways. they are similar to auxins and most are biodegradable by soil bacteria. however one group derived from trinitrotoluene have the impurity dioxin which is very toxic and causes fatality even in low concentrations. another herbicide is paraquat. it is highly toxic but it rapidly degrades in soil due to the action of bacteria and does not kill soil fauna. insecticides are used to rid farms of pests which damage crops. the insects damage not only standing crops but also stored ones and in the tropics it is reckoned that one third of the total production is lost during food storage. as with fungicides the first insecticides used in the nineteenth century were inorganic e. g. paris green and other compounds of arsenic. nicotine has also been used since the late eighteenth century. there are now two main groups of synthetic insecticides. organochlorines include ddt aldrin dieldrin and bhc. they are cheap to produce potent and persistent. ddt was used on a massive scale from the s with a peak of tonnes used. then usage fell as the harmful environmental effects were realized. it was found worldwide in fish and birds and was even discovered in the snow in the antarctic. it is only slightly soluble in water but is very soluble in the bloodstream. it affects the nervous and endocrine systems and causes the eggshells of birds to lack calcium causing them to be easily breakable. it is thought to be responsible for the decline of the numbers of birds of prey like ospreys and peregrine falcons in the s they are now recovering. as well as increased concentration via the food chain it is known to enter via permeable membranes so fish get it through their gills. as it has low water solubility it tends to stay at the water surface so organisms that live there are most affected. ddt found in fish that formed part of the human food chain caused concern but the levels found in the liver kidney and brain tissues was less than ppm and in fat was ppm which was below the level likely to cause harm. however ddt was banned in the uk and the united states to stop the further buildup of it in the food chain. u. s. manufacturers continued to sell ddt to developing countries who could not afford the expensive replacement chemicals and who did not have such stringent regulations governing the use of pesticides... organophosphates e. g. parathion methyl parathion and about other insecticides are available nationally. parathion is highly toxic methyl parathion is less so and malathion is generally considered safe as it has low toxicity and is rapidly broken down in the mammalian liver. this group works by preventing normal nerve transmission as cholinesterase is prevented from breaking down the transmitter substance acetylcholine resulting in uncontrolled muscle movements. the disposal of munitions and a lack of care in manufacture of munitions caused by the urgency of production can contaminate soil for extended periods. there is little published evidence on this type of contamination largely because of restrictions placed by governments of many countries on the publication of material related to war effort. however mustard gas stored during world war ii has contaminated some sites for up to years and the testing of anthrax as a potential biological weapon contaminated the whole island of gruinard. contaminated or polluted soil directly affects human health through direct contact with soil or via inhalation of soil contaminants which have vaporized potentially greater threats are posed by the infiltration of soil contamination into groundwater aquifers used for human consumption sometimes in areas apparently far removed from any apparent source of above ground contamination. this tends to result in the development of pollution related diseases. health consequences from exposure to soil contamination vary greatly depending on pollutant type pathway of attack and vulnerability of the exposed population. chronic exposure to chromium lead and other metals petroleum solvents and many pesticide and herbicide formulations can be carcinogenic can cause congenital disorders or can cause other chronic health conditions. industrial or man made concentrations of naturally occurring substances such as nitrate and ammonia associated with livestock manure from agricultural operations have also been identified as health hazards in soil and groundwater. chronic exposure to benzene at sufficient concentrations is known to be associated with higher incidence of leukemia. mercury and cyclodienes are known to induce higher incidences of kidney damage and some irreversible diseases. pcbs and cyclodienes are linked to liver toxicity. organophosphates and carbonates can induce a chain of responses leading to neuromuscular blockage. many chlorinated solvents induce liver changes kidney changes and depression of the central nervous system. there is an entire spectrum of further health effects such as headache nausea fatigue eye irritation and skin rash for the above cited and other chemicals. at sufficient dosages a large number of soil contaminants can cause death by exposure via direct contact inhalation or ingestion of contaminants in groundwater contaminated through soil. the scottish government has commissioned the institute of occupational medicine to undertake a review of methods to assess risk to human health from contaminated land. the overall aim of the project is to work up guidance that should be useful to scottish local authorities in assessing whether sites represent a significant possibility of significant harm to human health. it is envisaged that the output of the project will be a short document providing high level guidance on health risk assessment with reference to existing published guidance and methodologies that have been identified as being particularly relevant and helpful. the project will examine how policy guidelines have been developed for determining the acceptability of risks to human health and propose an approach for assessing what constitutes unacceptable risk in line with the criteria for sposh as defined in the legislation and the scottish statutory guidance. not unexpectedly soil contaminants can have significant deleterious consequences for ecosystems. there are radical soil chemistry changes which can arise from the presence of many hazardous chemicals even at low concentration of the contaminant species. these changes can manifest in the alteration of metabolism of endemic microorganisms and arthropods resident in a given soil environment. the result can be virtual eradication of some of the primary food chain which in turn could have major consequences for predator or consumer species. even if the chemical effect on lower life forms is small the lower pyramid levels of the food chain may ingest alien chemicals which normally become more concentrated for each consuming rung of the food chain. many of these effects are now well known such as the concentration of persistent ddt materials for avian consumers leading to weakening of egg shells increased chick mortality and potential extinction of species. effects occur to agricultural lands which have certain types of soil contamination. contaminants typically alter plant metabolism often causing a reduction in crop yields. this has a secondary effect upon soil conservation since the languishing crops can not shield the earths soil from erosion. some of these chemical contaminants have long half lives and in other cases derivative chemicals are formed from decay of primary soil contaminants. cleanup or environmental remediation is analyzed by environmental scientists who utilize field measurement of soil chemicals and also apply computer models for analyzing transport and fate of soil chemicals. various technologies have been developed for remediation of oil contaminated soil and sediments there are several principal strategies for remediation various national standards for concentrations of particular contaminants include the united states epa region preliminary remediation goals the u. s. epa region risk based concentrations and national environment protection council of australia guideline on investigation levels in soil and groundwater. the immense and sustained growth of the peoples republic of china since the s has exacted a price from the land in increased soil pollution. the ministry of ecology and environment believes it to be a threat to the environment to food safety and to sustainable agriculture. according to a scientific sampling million mu of chinas cultivated land have been polluted with contaminated water being used to irrigate a further. million mu and another million mu covered or destroyed by solid waste. in total the area accounts for one tenth of chinas cultivatable land and is mostly in economically developed areas. an estimated million tonnes of grain are contaminated by heavy metals every year causing direct losses of billion yuan. according to the received data from member states in the european union the number of estimated potential contaminated sites is more than. million and the identified contaminated sites around thousand. municipal and industrial wastes contribute most to soil contamination followed by the industrial commercial sector. mineral oil and heavy metals are the main contaminants contributing around to soil contamination. in terms of budget the management of contaminated sites is estimated to cost around billion euros annually. generic guidance commonly used in the united kingdom are the soil guideline values published by the department for environment food and rural affairs and the environment agency. these are screening values that demonstrate the minimal acceptable level of a substance. above this there can be no assurances in terms of significant risk of harm to human health. these have been derived using the contaminated land exposure assessment model. certain input parameters such as health criteria values age and land use are fed into clea uk to obtain a probabilistic output. guidance by the inter departmental committee for the redevelopment of contaminated land has been formally withdrawn by defra for use as a prescriptive document to determine the potential need for remediation or further assessment. the clea model published by defra and the environment agency in march sets a framework for the appropriate assessment of risks to human health from contaminated land as required by part iia of the environmental protection act. as part of this framework generic soil guideline values have currently been derived for ten contaminants to be used as intervention values. these values should not be considered as remedial targets but values above which further detailed assessment should be considered see dutch standards. three sets of clea sgvs have been produced for three different land uses namely it is intended that the sgvs replace the former icrcl values. the clea sgvs relate to assessing chronic risks to human health and do not apply to the protection of ground workers during construction or other potential receptors such as groundwater buildings plants or other ecosystems. the clea sgvs are not directly applicable to a site completely covered in hardstanding as there is no direct exposure route to contaminated soils. to date the first ten of fifty five contaminant sgvs have been published for the following arsenic cadmium chromium lead inorganic mercury nickel selenium ethyl benzene phenol and toluene. draft sgvs for benzene naphthalene and xylene have been produced but their publication is on hold. toxicological data has been published for each of these contaminants as well as for benzopyrene benzene dioxins furans and dioxin like pcbs naphthalene vinyl chloride tetrachloroethane and tetrachloroethane trichloroethane tetrachloroethene carbon tetrachloride dichloroethane trichloroethene and xylene. the sgvs for ethyl benzene phenol and toluene are dependent on the soil organic matter content content. as an initial screen the sgvs for som are considered to be appropriate. as of february there are a total of plus contaminated sites in canada. one infamous contaminated sited is located near a nickel copper smelting site in sudbury ontario. a study investigating the heavy metal pollution in the vicinity of the smelter reveals that elevated levels of nickel and copper were found in the soil values going as high as ppm ni and ppm cu within a. km range of the smelter location. other metals were also found in the soil such metals include iron cobalt and silver. furthermore upon examining the different vegetation surrounding the smelter it was evident that they too had been affected the results show that the plants contained nickel copper and aluminium as a result of soil contamination. in march the issue of uranium poisoning in punjab attracted press coverage. it was alleged to be caused by fly ash ponds of thermal power stations which reportedly lead to severe birth defects in children in the faridkot and bhatinda districts of punjab. the news reports claimed the uranium levels were more than times the maximum safe limit. in the government of india confirmed that the ground water in malwa belt of punjab has uranium metal that is above the trace limits set by the united nations world health organization. scientific studies based on over samples from various sampling points could not trace the source to fly ash and any sources from thermal power plants or industry as originally alleged. the study also revealed that the uranium concentration in ground water of malwa district is not times the who limits but only above the who limit in locations. this highest concentration found in samples was less than those found naturally in ground waters currently used for human purposes elsewhere such as finland. research is underway to identify natural or other sources for the uranium. plastic waste is choking our planet polluting the air water and soil both people and wildlife need to survive. and as this crisis spreads to every corner of the globe wwf is leading the charge to help reimagine how we source design dispose of and reuse the plastic materials communities most depend upon. because while plastic can help make our hospitals safer our food last longer and our packages more efficient to ship it has no place in nature. every day plastic is flowing into our natural environment at an unprecedented rate a dump truck every minute into our oceans alone. it s time to turn off the tap. together. wwf is uniting our global networks of industry leaders consumers and policymakers to transform our systems so the plastics we discard become plastics we use again. as everyday people continue doing their part to reduce reuse and recycle wwf is engaging policymakers to ensure the plastics leaving recycling bins stay in effective waste management systems and out of the hands of illegal plastic traffickers. through our resource plastic activation hub we re helping some of the world s leading companies translate ambitious plastic commitments into measurable change both across their business operations and well beyond their supply chains. we re working on the ground with local partners from indonesia to peru to keep plastic out of our planet s most extraordinary ecosystems. and in oceans the world over we re supporting communities and fishing crews big and small to improve gear use and recovery so issues like abandoned nets no longer pose one of the biggest threats to marine life. wwf is fighting for a world with no plastic in nature by. it s a world where our oceans teem with marine life not discarded nets bottles and bags. where no human breathes the toxic fumes of burning plastic. and where every indispensable plastic product is used to make another. it s a world where people and nature thrive together. join us. an exorbitant amount of plastic waste continues to plague our oceans threatening marine life and the people who depend on these waters for their livelihoods. despite the dire scope of this crisis the growing momentum to address it is promising. as we work towards a solution for the plastic waste crisis we must do it in a way that does not negatively impact other critical issues that are affecting the environment including the climate forests and food waste. for example when companies substitute paper products for plastics we must ensure that the paper comes from responsibly managed forests particularly those certified by the forest stewardship council. otherwise we re just shifting the environmental cost to another part of nature. wwf s living planet report found that global biodiversity declined by between and. over species are negatively impacted by plastic waste but we re only just starting to understand the effects of plastics on our ecosystems. plastic pollution has far reaching implications for local communities by posing a public health risk decreasing fish stock and contributing to climate change. communities in developing countries are particularly vulnerable to the effects of plastic pollution. in areas with poor infrastructure polluted coastlines where plastic accumulates can create a favorable breeding environment for disease carrying organisms such as insects and rodents. and plastic production represents up to of global petrol use on par with the aviation industry and incinerating plastic waste pollutes our air all while contributing to climate change. only of plastic waste in the us is recycled each year. when plastic ends up in nature this waste affects the fishery maritime and tourism industries causing an estimated billion in economic losses annually. our current waste management system and recycling infrastructure can not properly manage the volume of virgin plastic constantly entering the system. when we throw out plastic instead of recapturing and recycling it we miss an important opportunity to recapture the value of the resources already used for the production of our plastics. there is more than billion worth of plastic material sitting in the united states landfills at this very moment. wwf is advocating for a holistic solution that curbs plastic pollution and its many associated consequences. each one of us is part of the solutions needed for a plastic revolution. wwf works to raise awareness about ways we can address plastic waste in our daily lives through the choices we make about our consumption and habits. whether it s skipping some single use plastic packing or carrying a reusable water bottle we educate our wwf members and activists about the impact they can make to help end plastic pollution. wwf s campaign no plastic in nature aims to fix a broken system using a holistic approach. there is no single solution to plastic pollution we need a combination of strategies and engagement from all actors. by engaging all actors government businesses and the public we can examine every aspect of the life cycle of any given plastic material and identify key elements that are ripe for intervention. while our aim is to eliminate the leakage of plastic into nature by we have also set a goal for establishing a global legally binding agreement to end plastic pollution. such an agreement would introduce specific targets and pave the way for each nation to devise an action plan for addressing the plastic pollution epidemic. wwf is committed to engaging with the united states government and securing our elected officials support on this paris for plastics. companies are uniquely positioned to help drive large scale transformative change by improving their own plastic pollution footprint as well as influencing other key stakeholders like governments and consumers to do the same. through wwf s activation hub resource plastic we seek to redesign how businesses source use and dispose of plastics. to learn more about resource plastic please visit resource plastic. com. in coordination with several global consumer brand companies wwf has also established the bioplastic feedstock alliance a science driven organization which aims to evaluate diverse bioplastic feedstocks to better understand the potential sustainability opportunities of each. the bfa helps the bioplastic industry s emerging supply chain move in a positive direction. a major threat to marine biodiversity abandoned fishing gear or ghost gear is estimated to comprise up to of plastic waste in our oceans by volume. while this may seem like a small number ghost gear is the most harmful form of plastic pollution to marine species. ghost gear continues to capture wildlife well after it s abandoned pollute habitats and enters the food web as it degrades. ghost gear impacts of all marine mammals on the red list of threatened species. fishing feeds billions of people and is vital to the economies of countless coastal communities. but unsustainable practices litter the ocean with deadly traps that needlessly kill marine mammals turtles and seabirds. abandoned lost or discarded fishing gear commonly referred to as ghost gear contribute significantly to the problem of plastic pollution in our ocean. these gillnets traps and other types of fishing gear are particularly harmful because they can continue to catch target and non target species indiscriminately for years. this impacts important food resources as well as endangered species. because of this ghost gear has been coined as the most deadly form of marine plastic debris damaging vital ocean habitats aquatic life and livelihoods. eight million metric tons of plastic are leaking into our oceans every year. ask our government leaders to help stop plastics from leaking into our oceans. donate to support wwfs conservation efforts and say no to plastic by using wwf s reusable strawworld wildlife fund street n. w. washington dc world wildlife fund inc. is a nonprofit tax exempt charitable organization under section of the internal revenue code. donations are tax deductible as allowed by law. world wildlife fund. wwf and panda symbol are owned by wwf. all rights reserved. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. the requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. copyright national geographic societycopyright national geographic partners llc. all rights reserved air pollution is the release of pollutants such as gases particles biological molecules etc. into the air that is harmful to human health and the environment. air pollution refers to any physical chemical or biological change in the air. it is the contamination of air by harmful gases dust and smoke which affects plants animals and humans drastically. there is a certain percentage of gases present in the atmosphere. an increase or decrease in the composition of these gases is harmful to survival. this imbalance in the gaseous composition has resulted in an increase in earth s temperature which is known as global warming. there are two types of air pollutants the pollutants that directly cause air pollution are known as primary pollutants. sulphur dioxide emitted from factories is a primary pollutant. the pollutants formed by the intermingling and reaction of primary pollutants are known as secondary pollutants. smog formed by the intermingling of smoke and fog is a secondary pollutant. also read water pollutionfollowing are the important causes of air pollution the combustion of fossil fuels emits a large amount of sulphur dioxide. carbon monoxide released by incomplete combustion of fossil fuels also results in air pollution. the gases emitted from vehicles such as jeeps trucks cars buses etc. pollute the environment. these are the major sources of greenhouse gases and also result in diseases among individuals. ammonia is one of the most hazardous gases emitted during agricultural activities. the insecticides pesticides and fertilizers emit harmful chemicals in the atmosphere and contaminate it. factories and industries are the main source of carbon monoxide organic compounds hydrocarbons and chemicals. these are released into the air degrading its quality. in the mining process the minerals below the earth are extracted using large pieces of equipment. the dust and chemicals released during the process not only pollute the air but also deteriorate the health of the workers and people living in the nearby areas. the household cleaning products and paints contain toxic chemicals that are released in the air. the smell from the newly painted walls is the smell of the chemicals present in the paints. it not only pollutes the air but also affects breathing. also read ozone layer depletionthe hazardous effects of air pollution on the environment include air pollution has resulted in several respiratory disorders and heart diseases among humans. the cases of lung cancer have increased in the last few decades. children living near polluted areas are more prone to pneumonia and asthma. many people die every year due to the direct or indirect effects of air pollution. due to the emission of greenhouse gases there is an imbalance in the gaseous composition of the air. this has led to an increase in the temperature of the earth. this increase in earth s temperature is known as global warming. this has resulted in the melting of glaciers and an increase in sea levels. many areas are submerged underwater. the burning of fossil fuels releases harmful gases such as nitrogen oxides and sulphur oxides in the air. the water droplets combine with these pollutants become acidic and fall as acid rain which damages human animal and plant life. the release of chlorofluorocarbons halons and hydro chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere is the major cause of depletion of the ozone layer. the depleting ozone layer does not prevent the harmful ultraviolet rays coming from the sun and causes skin diseases and eye problems among individuals. the air pollutants suspend on the water bodies and affect the aquatic life. pollution also compels the animals to leave their habitat and shift to a new place. this renders them stray and has also led to the extinction of a large number of animal species. following are the measures one should adopt to control air pollution people should avoid using vehicles for shorter distances. rather they should prefer public modes of transport to travel from one place to another. this not only prevents pollution but also conserves energy. a large number of fossil fuels are burnt to generate electricity. therefore do not forget to switch off the electrical appliances when not in use. thus you can save the environment at the individual level. use of energy efficient devices such cfls also controls pollution to a greater level. the use of solar wind and geothermal energies reduce air pollution at a larger level. various countries including india have implemented the use of these resources as a step towards a cleaner environment. other air pollution control measures include also read environmental issuesto know more about what is air pollution its definition causes effects types of pollutants and air pollution control measures keep visiting byju s website or download the byju s app for further reference. put your understanding of this concept to test by answering a few mcqs. click start quiz to begin select the correct answer and click on the finish buttoncheck your score and answers at the end of the quizcongrats visit byju s for all biology related queries and study materialsyour result is as belowvery well explained. i could not find so amazing information on air pollution for school hw. epic stuff thank u for this this was very helpfull for me yes everyone has not aware about pollution and but we do effort for reduce pollution make our earth future brightright brothank you byjus for such an easy lesson relevant answers and easy to learn and understandbyjus helps me alotthanksat the time of lockdown the environment has improved but when the lockdown will end the pollution rate would increaseotherwise nicely explainedkeep it upthanx for all these info. a very informative pagethere is nothing more than living in a world full of polluted gas and we leave bad environment for our future generation. lets keep the word a beautiful place to live for everyone. very useful used it for my daughter s oralit is very usefuli understood everythingnice presentation and explanation and it s very useful for better understandingthank you so much this content was really very informative helpful and too useful for me. thanks to byjus thank you soo much for this info. it was really helpful for my projectthank you byjusthank you sooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo much this helped me in my projectthank you byju s. this helped in my preasentationit helped me a lot with my project thank you so much byjus it s very good for studentswell explained your mobile number and email id will not be published. required fields are marked request otp onvoice callwebsite post comment bookfree classbookfree classjump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. british poet w. h. auden once noted thousands have lived without love not one without water. yet while we all know water is crucial for life we trash it anyway. some percent of the world s wastewater is dumpedlargely untreatedback into the environment polluting rivers lakes and oceans. this widespread problem of water pollution is jeopardizing our health. unsafe water kills more people each year than war and all other forms of violence combined. meanwhile our drinkable water sources are finite less than percent of the earth s freshwater is actually accessible to us. without action the challenges will only increase by when global demand for freshwater is expected to be one third greater than it is now. sip a glass of cool clear water as you read this and you may think water pollution is a problem... somewhere else. but while most americans have access to safe drinking water potentially harmful contaminantsfrom arsenic to copper to leadhave been found in the tap water of every single state in the nation. still we re not hopeless against the threat to clean water. to better understand the problem and what we can do about it here s an overview of what water pollution is what causes it and how we can protect ourselves. water pollution occurs when harmful substancesoften chemicals or microorganismscontaminate a stream river lake ocean aquifer or other body of water degrading water quality and rendering it toxic to humans or the environment. water is uniquely vulnerable to pollution. known as a universal solvent water is able to dissolve more substances than any other liquid on earth. it s the reason we have kool aid and brilliant blue waterfalls. it s also why water is so easily polluted. toxic substances from farms towns and factories readily dissolve into and mix with it causing water pollution. when rain falls and seeps deep into the earth filling the cracks crevices and porous spaces of an aquifer it becomes groundwaterone of our least visible but most important natural resources. nearly percent of americans rely on groundwater pumped to the earth s surface for drinking water. for some folks in rural areas it s their only freshwater source. groundwater gets polluted when contaminantsfrom pesticides and fertilizers to waste leached from landfills and septic systemsmake their way into an aquifer rendering it unsafe for human use. ridding groundwater of contaminants can be difficult to impossible as well as costly. once polluted an aquifer may be unusable for decades or even thousands of years. groundwater can also spread contamination far from the original polluting source as it seeps into streams lakes and oceans. covering about percent of the earth surface water is what fills our oceans lakes rivers and all those other blue bits on the world map. surface water from freshwater sources accounts for more than percent of the water delivered to american homes. but a significant pool of that water is in peril. according to the most recent surveys on national water quality from the u. s. environmental protection agency nearly half of our rivers and streams and more than one third of our lakes are polluted and unfit for swimming fishing and drinking. nutrient pollution which includes nitrates and phosphates is the leading type of contamination in these freshwater sources. while plants and animals need these nutrients to grow they have become a major pollutant due to farm waste and fertilizer runoff. municipal and industrial waste discharges contribute their fair share of toxins as well. there s also all the random junk that industry and individuals dump directly into waterways. eighty percent of ocean pollution originates on landwhether along the coast or far inland. contaminants such as chemicals nutrients and heavy metals are carried from farms factories and cities by streams and rivers into our bays and estuaries from there they travel out to sea. meanwhile marine debrisparticularly plasticis blown in by the wind or washed in via storm drains and sewers. our seas are also sometimes spoiled by oil spills and leaksbig and smalland are consistently soaking up carbon pollution from the air. the ocean absorbs as much as a quarter of man made carbon emissions. when contamination originates from a single source it s called point source pollution. examples include wastewater discharged legally or illegally by a manufacturer oil refinery or wastewater treatment facility as well as contamination from leaking septic systems chemical and oil spills and illegal dumping. the epa regulates point source pollution by establishing limits on what can be discharged by a facility directly into a body of water. while point source pollution originates from a specific place it can affect miles of waterways and ocean. nonpoint source pollution is contamination derived from diffuse sources. these may include agricultural or stormwater runoff or debris blown into waterways from land. nonpoint source pollution is the leading cause of water pollution in u. s. waters but it s difficult to regulate since there s no single identifiable culprit. it goes without saying that water pollution can t be contained by a line on a map. transboundary pollution is the result of contaminated water from one country spilling into the waters of another. contamination can result from a disasterlike an oil spillor the slow downriver creep of industrial agricultural or municipal discharge. aurora photos alamynot only is the agricultural sector the biggest consumer of global freshwater resources with farming and livestock production using about percent of the earth s surface water supplies but it s also a serious water polluter. around the world agriculture is the leading cause of water degradation. in the united states agricultural pollution is the top source of contamination in rivers and streams the second biggest source in wetlands and the third main source in lakes. it s also a major contributor of contamination to estuaries and groundwater. every time it rains fertilizers pesticides and animal waste from farms and livestock operations wash nutrients and pathogenssuch bacteria and virusesinto our waterways. nutrient pollution caused by excess nitrogen and phosphorus in water or air is the number one threat to water quality worldwide and can cause algal blooms a toxic soup of blue green algae that can be harmful to people and wildlife. used water is wastewater. it comes from our sinks showers and toilets and from commercial industrial and agricultural activities. the term also includes stormwater runoff which occurs when rainfall carries road salts oil grease chemicals and debris from impermeable surfaces into our waterwaysmore than percent of the world s wastewater flows back into the environment without being treated or reused according to the united nations in some least developed countries the figure tops percent. in the united states wastewater treatment facilities process about billion gallons of wastewater per day. these facilities reduce the amount of pollutants such as pathogens phosphorus and nitrogen in sewage as well as heavy metals and toxic chemicals in industrial waste before discharging the treated waters back into waterways. that s when all goes well. but according to epa estimates our nation s aging and easily overwhelmed sewage treatment systems also release more than billion gallons of untreated wastewater each year. big spills may dominate headlines but consumers account for the vast majority of oil pollution in our seas including oil and gasoline that drips from millions of cars and trucks every day. moreover nearly half of the estimated million tons of oil that makes its way into marine environments each year comes not from tanker spills but from land based sources such as factories farms and cities. at sea tanker spills account for about percent of the oil in waters around the world while regular operations of the shipping industrythrough both legal and illegal dischargescontribute about one third. oil is also naturally released from under the ocean floor through fractures known as seeps. radioactive waste is any pollution that emits radiation beyond what is naturally released by the environment. it s generated by uranium mining nuclear power plants and the production and testing of military weapons as well as by universities and hospitals that use radioactive materials for research and medicine. radioactive waste can persist in the environment for thousands of years making disposal a major challenge. consider the decommissioned hanford nuclear weapons production site in washington where the cleanup of million gallons of radioactive waste is expected to cost more than billion and last through. accidentally released or improperly disposed of contaminants threaten groundwater surface water and marine resources. to put it bluntly water pollution kills. in fact it caused. million deaths in according to a study published in the lancet. contaminated water can also make you ill. every year unsafe water sickens about billion people. and low income communities are disproportionately at risk because their homes are often closest to the most polluting industries. waterborne pathogens in the form of disease causing bacteria and viruses from human and animal waste are a major cause of illness from contaminated drinking water. diseases spread by unsafe water include cholera giardia and typhoid. even in wealthy nations accidental or illegal releases from sewage treatment facilities as well as runoff from farms and urban areas contribute harmful pathogens to waterways. thousands of people across the united states are sickened every year by legionnaires disease with cases cropping up from california s disneyland to manhattan s upper east side. todd mcinturf the detroit news apmeanwhile the plight of residents in flint michiganwhere cost cutting measures and aging water infrastructure created the recent lead contamination crisisoffers a stark look at how dangerous chemical and other industrial pollutants in our water can be. the problem goes far beyond flint and involves much more than lead as a wide range of chemical pollutantsfrom heavy metals such as arsenic and mercury to pesticides and nitrate fertilizersare getting into our water supplies. once they re ingested these toxins can cause a host of health issues from cancer to hormone disruption to altered brain function. children and pregnant women are particularly at risk. even swimming can pose a risk. every year. million americans contract health issues such as skin rashes pinkeye respiratory infections and hepatitis from sewage laden coastal waters according to epa estimates. in order to thrive healthy ecosystems rely on a complex web of animals plants bacteria and fungiall of which interact directly or indirectly with each other. harm to any of these organisms can create a chain effect imperiling entire aquatic environments. when water pollution causes an algal bloom in a lake or marine environment the proliferation of newly introduced nutrients stimulates plant and algae growth which in turn reduces oxygen levels in the water. this dearth of oxygen known as eutrophication suffocates plants and animals and can create dead zones where waters are essentially devoid of life. in certain cases these harmful algal blooms can also produce neurotoxins that affect wildlife from whales to sea turtles. chemicals and heavy metals from industrial and municipal wastewater contaminate waterways as well. these contaminants are toxic to aquatic lifemost often reducing an organism s life span and ability to reproduceand make their way up the food chain as predator eats prey. that s how tuna and other big fish accumulate high quantities of toxins such as mercury. marine ecosystems are also threatened by marine debris which can strangle suffocate and starve animals. much of this solid debris such as plastic bags and soda cans gets swept into sewers and storm drains and eventually out to sea turning our oceans into trash soup and sometimes consolidating to form floating garbage patches. discarded fishing gear and other types of debris are responsible for harming more than different species of marine life. meanwhile ocean acidification is making it tougher for shellfish and coral to survive. though they absorb about a quarter of the carbon pollution created each year by burning fossil fuels oceans are becoming more acidic. this process makes it harder for shellfish and other species to build shells and may impact the nervous systems of sharks clownfish and other marine life. it s easy to tsk tsk the oil company with a leaking tanker but we re all accountable to some degree for today s water pollution problem. fortunately there are some simple ways you can prevent water contamination or at least limit your contribution to it one of the most effective ways to stand up for our waters is to speak out in support of the clean water rule which clarifies the clean water act s scope and protects the drinking water of one in three americans. tell the federal government the u. s. army corps of engineers and your local elected officials that you support the clean water rule. also learn how you and those around you can get involved in the policymaking process. our public waterways serve every american. we should all have a say in how they re protected. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. the mighty bivalves are both and this former schoolteacher and bartender seeks to inspire a new generation of aquaculturists while putting north carolina oysters on the map. the humble bivalves which concentrate everything from heavy metals to cancer drugs in their tissues provide an ideal way for scientists to monitor nearshore water health. the rollback jeopardizes the streams that flow into the state s rivers lakes and bays millions of acres of wetlands across the country and the drinking water supply. litter sewage plastic and other pollutants do more than just ruin the beauty of the beach. they are closing down coastal areas destroying marine life and making people seriously sick. federal rollbacks could leave new mexico s limited water dirtier by excluding up to percent of the state s waterways from protection. the pfas laden firefighting foam used in training exercises at military bases easily slips into groundwater supplies tainting everything around it. with their latest rollback the president and the epa chief show that they either don t understand how water pollution worksor simply don t care. as droughts parch the southeast interstate squabbles heat up over the tennessee river. seth siegel author of the new book troubled water what s wrong with what we drink says we must change people s mind sets and get to the root of the issue to ensure safe drinking water for everyone. ugly foul smelling and sometimes toxic algal blooms are becoming more common in freshwater ecosystems like rivers lakes ponds and reservoirs. here s a look at how excess algae can impact the environmentand human health. in a move that could open the door to industrial waste and interstate squabbles the ohio river valley water sanitation commission is making its water quality standards voluntary. president trump revokes the clean water rule and doubles down on his fake weather forecast while the bureau of land management hitches up its wagons to move west. the fate of southern arizona s embattled san pedro river could hinge on whether the government acts to protect the nearly extinct arizona eryngoand in doing so puts the brakes on groundwater pumping that s draining the landscape. from fertilizer runoff to methane emissions large scale industrial agriculture pollution takes a toll on the environment. the administration relocates science jobs refuses to fill others and tosses a lifeline to polluters. otherwise it was just an ordinary week of secret meetings and betrayals of the public interest. a growing number of communitiesboth coastal and inlandare finding themselves underwater. extreme weather sea level rise and other climate change impacts are increasingly to blame. here s a look at what links flooding and our warming world. more than craft breweries from across the country including brooklyn brewery and new belgium brewing company are joining nrdc to explain why clean water is essential for great tasting beer. by relying on plants soil and natural systems to manage rainfall runoff green infrastructure tackles urban water woes and boosts climate resilience. here s how. after an illegal dumping of close to tons of dangerous sludge and contaminated materials across the street from two schools a kentucky community struggles with what to do next. ten years after the disaster at a tennessee power plant the cleanup crew is seeking justice. at the same time the trump administration is weakening protections for this toxic pollution. as the trump administration ratchets up its rhetoric demanding billions for a wall american communities along the mexico border are in need of basic services like reliable sewage treatment. after officials repeatedly dismissed claims that flint s water was making people sick residents took action. here s how the lead contamination crisis unfoldedand what we can learn from it. the problem of how to dispose of nuclear waste has haunted the united states for six decades. it s now landed on new mexico s doorstep. lizzie carr is shining a light on what is floating through the world s waterways and breaking athletic records along the way. residents of cities like pittsburgh and newark continue to face high levels of this toxic metal in their drinking water supplies. here s what to do if this crisis affects you. here s why this environmental and public health win is so important. the trump administration wants to open our waterways back up to pollution. for years the state has ignored its foamy rivers and water supplies contaminated with chemicals called pfass. the big apple s combined sewer system is years oldand in desperate need of improvement. vague regulations let government officials hide drinking water contamination from the public. toxic algal blooms are suffocating waterways from the gulf of mexico to lake erie. for drinking water flood control climate defense habitat protection fishing swimming and of course craft beer. quick and easy things you can do to reduce water pollution and runoff. the cruel and un american folly of shutting down the epa s environmental justice program. lots of people think drinking bottled water is safer. is it thanks to the mississippi river s trash stream the gulf has some of the highest concentrations of plastic in the world. plus wheeler ignores factory farm pollution zinke ignores damage to wetlands and trump ignores public opposition to drilling the arctic refuge. when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosureswe use cookies to analyse how visitors use our website and to help us provide the best possible experience for users. view our cookie policy. tweet wwf ral garcavisit the wwf teachers sectionmore information on oceansriverslakeswetlandsfreshwateragricultureworking to sustain the natural world for the benefit of people and nature wwf world wide fund for nature panda symbol wwf world wide fund for nature wwf is a wwf registered trademark creative commons license. water pollution is defined as the presence in groundwater of toxic chemicals and biological agents that exceed what is naturally found in the water and may pose a threat to human health and or the environment. additionally water pollution may consist of chemicals introduced into the water bodies as a result of various human activities. any amount of those chemicals pollutes the water regardless of the harm they may pose to human health and the environment. many of the chlorinated solvents commonly used in industry are examples of such chemicals polluting our waters exclusively due to human activities. another example is mtbe a gasoline oxygenate that is currently banned in the u. s. regardless of their provenance the chemicals or biological agents causing water pollution are generically referred to as water pollutants. the chemical and biological agents represent the main causes of water pollution and are generically referred to as water pollutants. any kind of water can become polluted regardless of its size or location. this includes lakes from remote areas or huge water bodies and is due to the air transportation of pollutant particles and their transfer into precipitation water. the groundwater and surface water consist of swimming pools ponds lakes creeks rivers seas and oceans that may all become polluted at some point. due to the quick diffusion and dissipation of contamination and the faster natural degradation processes the bigger the water body is the shorter the time required for naturally cleansing the pollution and recovery. there are various types of water pollution based on the various causes of water pollution. various classifications can be made based on various water pollution causes. the type of the water pollutants based on this classification criteria water pollution can be i chemical when various chemicals are the water pollution causes. the following chemicals are the most common water pollutants ii radiological when radioactive materials are the water pollutant causes. iii biological when various microorganisms worms and or algae occurring in a large number are the water pollution causes. this type of pollution is caused by decaying organic material in water animal wastes as well as improper disposal of human wastes.. the type of the source of water pollutants these are localized sources like an industrial process a mining activity etc. these sources are usually regulated so that the effect may be predicted and the impact minimized. however accidental leaks and spills are an exception to that. these are unidentified sources from which pollutants are carried away by water discharges and runoffs. non point pollution may involve a broad range of pollutants but in lower amounts than the point sources. the main sources of pollution are all resulted from the disposal of chemical substances coming from medical industrial and household waste chaotic agricultural fertilizers disposal and accidental oil spills that pollute the water to a large extent. examples of major water pollutants that affect the health of humans are examples of major water pollutants that affect the ecosystem only are the following water pollution may cause a large variety of diseases and poses a serious problem for human health. this is mainly because we may get exposed to polluted water in various ways including but not necessarily limited to the effects of water pollution may appear immediately after exposure and be more or less violent in the case of drinking water with a high amount of pollutants. on the other hand the effects may appear some time after repetitive exposure to water contaminated with lower amounts of pollutants. the health effects of drinking contaminated water may range from simple intoxication and stomach aches to deadly diseases or sudden death. february read by usersaugust read by usersfebruary read by userscopyright www. environmentalpollutioncenters. org all rights reserved. disclaimer terms of use privacy policy sitemapcopyright national geographic societycopyright national geographic partners llc. all rights reservedthe requested url was not found on this server. additionally a not founderror was encountered while trying to use an errordocument to handle the request. by chris woodford. last updated june. over two thirds of earths surface is covered by water less than a third is taken up by land. as earths population continues to grow people are putting ever increasing pressure on the planets waterresources. in a sense our oceans rivers and other inland waters arebeing squeezed by human activitiesnot so they take up less room butso their quality is reduced. poorer water quality means water pollution. we know that pollution is a human problem because it is arelatively recent development in the planets history before the century industrial revolution people lived more in harmony with theirimmediate environment. as industrialization has spread around theglobe so the problem of pollution has spread with it. when earthspopulation was much smaller no one believed pollution would everpresent a serious problem. it was once popularly believed thatthe oceans were far too big to pollute. today with around billionpeople on the planet it has become apparent that there are limits. pollution is one of the signs that humans have exceeded those limits. how serious is the problem according to the environmental campaign organizationwwf pollution from toxic chemicals threatens life on this planet. every ocean and every continent from the tropics to the once pristine polar regions is contaminated. photo detergent pollution entering a river. photo courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. water pollution can be defined in many ways. usually it means oneor more substances have built up in water to such an extent that theycause problems for animals or people. oceans lakes rivers and otherinland waters can naturally clean up a certain amount of pollution bydispersing it harmlessly. if you poured a cup of black ink into ariver the ink would quickly disappear into the rivers much larger volume of clean water. the inkwould still be there in the river but in such a low concentration thatyou would not be able to see it. at such low levels the chemicals in the ink probably would not present any real problem. however if you poured gallons of ink into a river every few seconds through a pipe the river would quickly turn black. the chemicals in the ink could very quickly have an effect on the quality of the water. this in turn could affect the health of all the plants animals and humans whoselives depend on the river. photo pollution means adding substances to the environment that dont belong therelike theair pollution from this smokestack. pollution is not always as obvious as this however. thus water pollution is all about quantities how much of apolluting substance is released and how big a volume of water it isreleased into. a small quantity of a toxic chemical may have littleimpact if it is spilled into the ocean from a ship. but the same amountof the same chemical can have a much bigger impact pumped into a lakeor river where there is less clean water to disperse it. water pollution almost always means that some damage has been done to an ocean river lake or other water source. a united nations report defined ocean pollution as fortunately earth is forgiving and damage from water pollution is often reversible. when we think of earths water resources we think of hugeoceans lakes and rivers. water resources like these are called surfacewaters. the most obvious type of water pollution affects surfacewaters. for example a spill from an oil tanker creates an oil slickthat can affect a vast area of the ocean. not all of earths water sits on its surface however. a great dealof water is held in underground rock structures known as aquifers which we can not see and seldom think about. water stored underground in aquifers is known as groundwater. aquifers feed our rivers and supply much of our drinking water. theytoo can become polluted for example when weed killers used inpeoples gardens drain into the ground. groundwater pollution is muchless obvious than surface water pollution but is no less of a problem. in a study in iowa in the united states found that over half thestates groundwater wells were contaminated with weed killers. you might think things would have improved since then but two decades on all thats really changed is the name of the chemicalswere using. today numerous scientific studies are still finding weed killers in groundwater in worrying quantities a study discovered glyphosate in percent of groundwater samples from catalonia spain scientific opinion differs on whether this is safe or not. surface waters and groundwater are the two types of water resourcesthat pollution affects. there are also two different ways in whichpollution can occur. if pollution comes from a single location such asa discharge pipe attached to a factory it is known as point sourcepollution. other examples of point source pollution include an oilspill from a tanker a discharge from a smoke stack or someone pouring oil from their car down a drain. a great deal ofwater pollution happens not from one single source but from manydifferent scattered sources. this is called nonpoint sourcepollution. photo above point source pollution comes from a single well defined place such as this pipe. below nonpoint source pollution comes from many sources. all the industrial plants alongside a river and theships that service them may be polluting the river collectively. both photos courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. when point source pollution enters the environment the place mostaffected is usually the area immediately around the source. forexample when a tanker accident occurs the oil slick is concentratedaround the tanker itself and in the right ocean conditions thepollution disperses the further away from the tanker you go. this isless likely to happen with nonpoint source pollution which bydefinition enters the environment from many different places at once. sometimes pollution that enters the environment in one place has aneffect hundreds or even thousands of miles away. this is known as transboundarypollution. one example is the way radioactive waste travels throughthe oceans from nuclear reprocessing plants in england and france tonearby countries such as ireland and norway. some forms of water pollution are very obvious everyone has seen tvnews footage of oil slicks filmed from helicopters flying overhead. water pollution is usually less obvious and much harder to detect thanthis. but how can we measure water pollution when we can not see it howdo we even know its there there are two main ways of measuring the quality of water. one is totake samples of the water and measure the concentrations of differentchemicals that it contains. if the chemicals are dangerous or theconcentrations are too great we can regard the water as polluted. measurements like this are known as chemical indicators ofwater quality. another way to measure water quality involves examiningthe fish insects and other invertebrates that the water will support. if many different types of creatures can live in a river the quality is likely tobe very good if the river supports no fish life at all the quality isobviously much poorer. measurements like this are called biologicalindicators of water quality. most water pollution doesnt begin in the water itself. take the oceans around percent of ocean pollution enters our seas from the land. virtually any human activity can have an effect on the quality of ourwater environment. when farmers fertilize the fields the chemicalsthey use are gradually washed by rain into the groundwater or surfacewaters nearby. sometimes the causes of water pollution are quitesurprising. chemicals released by smokestacks can enter theatmosphere and then fall back to earth as rain entering seas rivers and lakes and causing water pollution. thats called atmospheric deposition. water pollution has many different causes and this is one of the reasons why it is such adifficult problem to solve. with billions of people on the planet disposing of sewage wasteis a major problem. according to figures from the world health organization some billion people dont have access to safe drinking wateror the most basic sanitation. billion lack safely managed sanitation. although there have been great improvements in securing access to clean water relatively little genuine progress has been made on improving global sanitation in the last decade. sewage disposal affects peoples immediate environments and leads towater related illnesses such as diarrhea that kills children under five each year. in developed countries most people have flush toilets that takesewage waste quickly and hygienically away from their homes. yet the problem of sewage disposal does not end there. when youflush the toilet the waste has to go somewhere and even after itleaves the sewage treatment works there is still waste to dispose of. sometimes sewage waste is pumped untreated into the sea. until the early s around million tons of sewage was dumpedby barge from new york city each year. according to figures from the uk governments department forthe environment food and rural affairs the sewers of britain collect around billion liters of waste water every day there are still sewage overflow pipes through which in certain circumstances such as heavy storms raw sewage is pumped untreated into the sea. the new river that crosses the border from mexicointo california once carried with it million gallons of raw sewage each day a new waste water plant on the us mexico border completed in substantiallysolved that problem. unfortunately even in some of the richest nations thepractice of dumping sewage into the sea continues. in early it was reported that the tiny island of guernsey has decided to continue dumping tons of raw sewageinto the sea each day. in theory sewage is a completely natural substance that should bebroken down harmlessly in the environment percent of sewage is water. in practice sewage contains all kinds of other chemicals from the pharmaceutical drugs people take tothe paper plastic and other wastes they flush down their toilets. when people are sick with viruses the sewage they produce carriesthose viruses into the environment. it is possible to catch illnessessuch as hepatitis typhoid and cholera from river and sea water. photo during crop spraying some chemicals will drain into the soil. eventually they seep intorivers and other watercourses. photo courtesy of us department of agriculture agricultural research service. suitably treated and used in moderate quantities sewage can be afertilizer it returns important nutrients to the environment such asnitrogen and phosphorus which plants and animals need for growth. thetrouble is sewage is often released in much greater quantities thanthe natural environment can cope with. chemical fertilizers used byfarmers also add nutrients to the soil which drain into rivers andseas and add to the fertilizing effect of the sewage. together sewageand fertilizers can cause a massive increase in the growth of algae orplankton that overwhelms huge areas of oceans lakes or rivers. thisis known as a harmful algal bloom. it is harmful because itremoves oxygen from the water that kills other forms of life leadingto what is known as a dead zone. the gulf of mexico has one ofthe worlds most spectacular dead zones. each summer accordingto studies by the noaa it typically grows to an area of around square miles which isabout the same size as the state of connecticut. a few statistics illustrate the scale of the problem that wastewater cancause. around half of all ocean pollution is caused by sewage and wastewater. each year the world generates perhaps billion tons of industrialwaste much of which is pumped untreated into rivers oceans and otherwaterways. in the united states alone around factories takeclean water from rivers and many pump polluted waters back in theirplace. however there have been major improvements in waste watertreatment recently. since in the united states the environmental protection agency has invested about billion in improving water treatment plants that as of serve around percent of the us population. however another billion is still needed to update and upgrade the system. factories are point sources of water pollution but quite a lot ofwater is polluted by ordinary people from nonpoint sources this is howordinary water becomes waste water in the first place. virtually everyone pours chemicals of one sort or another down theirdrains or toilets. even detergents used inwashing machines anddishwashers eventually end up in our rivers and oceans. so do thepesticides we use on our gardens. a lot of toxic pollution also enterswaste water from highway runoff. highways are typically coveredwith a cocktail of toxic chemicalseverything from spilled fuel andbrake fluids to bits of worn tires and exhaust emissions. when it rains these chemicals washinto drains and rivers. it is not unusual for heavy summer rainstormsto wash toxic chemicals into rivers in such concentrations that theykill large numbers of fish overnight. it has been estimated that inone year the highway runoff from a single large city leaks as much oilinto our water environment as a typical tanker spill. some highway runoff runs away into drains others can pollute groundwater or accumulate in the land next to a road making it increasingly toxic as the years go by. detergents are relatively mild substances. at the opposite end of thespectrum are highly toxic chemicals such as polychlorinatedbiphenyls. they were once widely used to manufactureelectronic circuit boards but their harmful effects have now been recognized and their use is highly restricted in many countries. nevertheless an estimated half million tons of pcbs were dischargedinto the environment during the century. in a classicexample of transboundary pollution traces of pcbs have even been foundin birds and fish in the arctic. they were carried there through theoceans thousands of miles from where they originally entered theenvironment. although pcbs are widely banned their effects will befelt for many decades because they last a long time in the environmentwithout breaking down. another kind of toxic pollution comes from heavy metals such aslead cadmium and mercury. lead was once commonly used in gasoline though its use is now restricted in some countries. mercuryand cadmium are still used in batteries. until recently a highlytoxic chemical called tributyltin was used in paints toprotect boats from the ravaging effects of the oceans. ironically however tbt was gradually recognized as a pollutant boats paintedwith it were doing as much damage to the oceans as the oceans weredoing to the boats. the best known example of heavy metal pollution in the oceans tookplace in when a japanese factory discharged a significant amountof mercury metal into minamata bay contaminating the fish stocksthere. it took a decade for the problem to come to light. by that time many local people had eaten the fish and around were poisoned. hundreds of people were left dead or disabled. people view radioactive waste with great alarmand for good reason. at high enough concentrations it can kill in lower concentrations itcan cause cancers and other illnesses. the biggest sources ofradioactive pollution in europe are two factories that reprocess wastefuel from nuclear power plants sellafield on the north west coast of britain and cap la hague on thenorth coast of france. both discharge radioactive waste water into thesea which ocean currents then carry around the world. countries suchas norway which lie downstream from britain receive significantdoses of radioactive pollution from sellafield. the norwegian government has repeatedly complained that sellafield hasincreased radiation levels along its coast by times. both the irish and norwegian governments continue to press forthe plants closure. photo oil tanker spills are the most spectacular forms of pollution and the ones that catch public attention but only a fraction of all water pollution happens this way. photo courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. when we think of ocean pollution huge black oil slicks often springto mind yet these spectacular accidents represent only a tiny fractionof all the pollution entering our oceans. even considering oil byitself tanker spills are not as significant as they might seem only percent of the oil that enters the oceans comes from tanker accidents over percent of oil pollution at sea comes from routine shipping and from theoil people pour down drains on land. however what makes tanker spillsso destructive is the sheer quantity of oil they release at once inother words the concentration of oil they produce in one verylocalized part of the marine environment. the biggest oil spill inrecent years occurred when the tanker exxon valdez broke up inprince william sound in alaska in. around million gallons of oil were released into the pristine wildernessenough to fill your living room times over estimates of the marine animals killed in the spillvary from approximately sea otters and birds to as many as sea otters and sea birds. several billion salmon and herring eggs are also believed to have been destroyed. if youve ever taken part in a community beach clean youll knowthat plastic is far and away the most common substance that washes upwith the waves. there are three reasons for this plastic is one ofthe most common materials used for making virtually every kind ofmanufactured object from clothing to automobile parts plasticis light and floats easily so it can travel enormous distances acrossthe oceans most plastics are not biodegradable which means that things likeplastic bottle tops can survive in the marine environment for a long time. while plastics are not toxic in quite the same way as poisonouschemicals they nevertheless present a major hazard to seabirds fish and other marine creatures. for example plastic fishing lines andother debris can strangle or choke fish. about half of allthe worlds seabird species are known to have eaten plastic residues. in one study of shearwaters in the north pacific over percent of the birds were found to contain plastic residues in their stomachs. in the early s marine scientist tim benton collecteddebris from a km length of beach in the remote pitcairn islandsin the south pacific. his study recorded approximately a thousandpieces of garbage including pieces of plastic plastic bottles and two dolls heads. today much media attention focuses on the great pacific garbage patch a floating oceanic graveyard of plastic junk roughly three times the size of france discovered by sailor charles j. moore in. but as youll know well enough if youve ever taken part in a community beachclean persistent plastic litters every ocean on the planet some million tons of new plastic are dumped in the sea every single year. most peoples idea of water pollution involves things like sewage toxic metals or oil slicks but pollution can be biological as well aschemical. in some parts of the world alien species are a majorproblem. alien species are animals or plants from one region that have been introduced into adifferent ecosystem where they do not belong. outside their normalenvironment they have no natural predators so they rapidly run wild crowding out the usual animals or plants that thrive there. commonexamples of alien species include zebra mussels in the great lakes ofthe usa which were carried there from europe by ballast water. the mediterranean sea has been invaded by akind of alien algaecalled caulerpa taxifolia. in the black sea an alien jellyfishcalled mnemiopsis leidyi reduced fish stocks by percent afterarriving in ballast water. in san francisco bay asian clams called potamocorbulaamurensis also introduced by ballast water have dramaticallyaltered the ecosystem. in cornell universitys david pimentel estimated that alien invaders like this cost the us economy billion a year in the european commission put the cost to europe at billion a year and growingall the time. photo invasive species above water hyacinth crowding out a waterway around an old fence post. photo by steve hillebrand. below non native zebra mussels clumped on a native mussel. both photos courtesy of us fish wildlife service photo library. these are the most common forms of pollutionbut by no means theonly ones. heat or thermal pollution from factories and powerplants also causes problems in rivers. by raising the temperature itreduces the amount of oxygen dissolved in the water thus also reducingthe level of aquatic life that the river can support. another type of pollution involves the disruption of sedimentsthat flow from rivers into the sea. dams built for hydroelectric poweror water reservoirs can reduce the sediment flow. this reduces the formation of beaches increases coastal erosion and reduces the flow ofnutrients from rivers into seas. increased sediments can also present a problem. during construction work soil rock and other fine powders sometimes enters nearby rivers in large quantities causing it to become turbid. the extra sediment can block the gills of fish effectively suffocating them. construction firms often now take precautions to prevent this kind of pollution from happening. some people believe pollution is an inescapable result of humanactivity they argue that if we want to have factories cities ships cars oil and coastal resorts some degree of pollution is almostcertain to result. in other words pollution is a necessary evil that peoplemust put up with if they want to make progress. fortunately noteveryone agrees with this view. one reason people have woken up to theproblem of pollution is that it brings costs of its own thatundermine any economic benefits that come about by polluting. take oil spills for example. they can happen if tankers are toopoorly built to survive accidents at sea. but the economic benefit ofcompromising on tanker quality brings an economic cost when an oilspill occurs. the oil can wash up on nearby beaches devastate the ecosystem and severely affect tourism. the main problem is that the people whobear the cost of the spill arenot the people who caused the problem in the first place. yet arguably everyone who puts gasoline into their caror uses almost any kind of petroleum fueledtransportcontributes to the problem in some way. so oil spills are aproblem for everyone not just people who live by the coast and tankeroperates. sewage is another good example of how pollution can affect us all. sewage discharged into coastal waters can wash up on beaches and causea health hazard. people who bathe or surf in the water can fall ill ifthey swallow polluted wateryet sewage can have other harmful effectstoo it can poison shellfish that grownear the shore. people who eat poisoned shellfish risk suffering froman acuteand sometimes fatalillness called paralytic shellfishpoisoning. shellfish is no longer caught along many shores becauseit is simply too polluted with sewage or toxic chemical wastes thathave discharged from the land nearby. pollution matters because it harms the environment on which peopledepend. the environment is not something distant and separate from ourlives. its not a pretty shoreline hundreds of miles from our homes ora wilderness landscape that we see only on tv. the environment iseverything that surrounds us that gives us life and health. destroyingthe environment ultimately reduces the quality of our own livesandthat most selfishly is why pollution should matter to all of us. there is no easy way to solve water pollution if there were itwouldnt be so much of a problem. broadly speaking there are threedifferent things that can help to tackle the problemeducation laws and economicsand they work together as a team. making people aware of the problem is the first step to solving it. in the early s when surfers in britain grew tired of catching illnessesfrom water polluted with sewage they formed a group called surfersagainst sewage to force governments and water companies to clean uptheir act. people whove grown tired of walking the worlds pollutedbeaches often band together to organize community beach cleaningsessions. anglers who no longer catch so many fish have campaigned fortougher penalties against factories that pour pollution into ourrivers. greater public awareness can make a positive difference. one of the biggest problems with water pollution is itstransboundary nature. many rivers cross countries while seas spanwhole continents. pollution discharged by factories in one country withpoor environmental standards can cause problems in neighboringnations even when they have tougher laws and higher standards. environmental laws can make it tougher for people to pollute but to bereally effective they have to operate across national and internationalborders. this is why we have international laws governing the oceans such as the un convention on the law of the sea the london convention the marpol international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships and the ospar convention for the protection of the marineenvironment of the north east atlantic. the european union haswater protection laws that apply to all of itsmember states. they include the bathing water directive which seeks to ensure the quality of the waters that people use forrecreation. most countries also have their own water pollution laws. inthe united states for example there is thelean water actand the safe drinking water act. most environmental experts agree that the best way to tacklepollution is through something called the polluter pays principle. this means that whoever causes pollution should have to pay to clean itup one way or another. polluter pays can operate in all kinds of ways. it could mean that tanker owners should have to take out insurance thatcovers the cost of oil spill cleanups for example. it could also meanthat shoppers should have to pay for their plastic grocery bags as isnow common in ireland to encourage recycling and minimize waste. or itcould mean that factories that use rivers must have their water inletpipes downstream of their effluent outflow pipes so if they causepollution they themselves are the first people to suffer. ultimately the polluter pays principle is designed to deter people from pollutingby making it less expensive for them to behave in an environmentallyresponsible way. life is ultimately about choicesand so is pollution. we can livewith sewage strewn beaches dead rivers and fish that are toopoisonous to eat. or we can work together to keep the environment cleanso the plants animals and people who depend on it remain healthy. wecan take individual action to help reduce water pollution for example by using environmentally friendly detergents not pouring oil downdrains reducing pesticides and so on. we can take community actiontoo by helping out on beach cleans or litter picks to keep our riversand seas that little bit cleaner. and we can take action as countriesand continents to pass laws that will make pollution harder and theworld less polluted. working together we can make pollution less of aproblemand the world a better place. wherever possible ive referenced my sources with links the following notes are mostly references to books journals and other offline reports that cant be linked the same way. please do not copy our articles onto blogs and other websitesarticles from this website are registered at the us copyright office. copying or otherwise using registered works without permission removing this or other copyright notices and or infringing related rights could make you liable to severe civil or criminal penalties. text copyright chris woodford. all rights reserved. full copyright notice and terms of use. this article was originally written for the uk rivers network and first published on their website in april. it is revised and updated every year. please rate or give feedback on this page and i will make a donation to wateraid. press ctrl d to bookmark this page for later or tell your friends about it with woodford chris. water pollution. retrieved from https www. explainthatstuff. com waterpollution. html. water pollution has been documented as a contributor to a wide range of health problems and disorders in humans. it has also been shown to have drastically negative impacts on wild animals and the environment as a whole. there are quite a few different effects of the types of water pollution that are of significant importance to humans. water pollution can pose health dangers to humans who come into contact with it either directly or indirectly. the risks of your health being negatively impacted by polluted drinking water in a developed country is small in comparison with developing countries. however it is possible to become ill from contaminated water. when you are out hiking you can acquire giardiasis that can lead to the presentation of acute symptoms like vomiting and intense nausea. this infection is caused by drinking water that has been fouled by animal wastes in untreated waterways. in anthropogenic environments like cities and towns the potential toxins are far more numerous. the effects of agricultural runoff and land pollution have on waterways rivers streams and ultimately the ocean introduces toxic chemcials and livestock waste into water supplies and the ocean. hurricane damage and flooding of farms and farmlands have resulted in an ever increasing amount of toxic pollutants in water to the detriment of human marine and aquatic life. health risks from pollution vary from area to area. one of the most pervasive non localized water pollution issues facing the world today is the level of mercury in the oceans. inorganic mercury is a common byproduct of a number of industrial processes. the level of mercury in fish is mostly dangerous for small children and women who might become pregnant are pregnant or are nursing. mercury has been found to interfere with the development of the central nervous system in fetuses and young children which could potentially lead to a large amount of long term side effects. in louisiana water quality can be so bad in many waterways that fish advisories are often posted. people are warned against eating fish from these contaminated waterways. this is largely due to industrial runoff from localized sources and the accumulative effects of runoff and dumping from states that lie along the mississippi river. when the river empties into louisiana it brings those accumulated toxins with it. this is believed to lead to higher rates of cancer in areas surrounding the mississippi delta in an area that is colloquially referred to as cancer alley. phosphorous runoff from industry can get into waterways and create toxic algal blooms. these blooms have been linked to higher occurrences of paralytic shellfish poisoning in humans which can lead to death. according to the national park service the minnesota pollution control agency has taken on the project to clean up the mississippi river. the ambitious goal is to restore the river so it is once more fishable and swimmable. the mpca has teamed up with numerous partners to work on cleaning up the mississippi river and warns it will take several years to undo decades of damage. water pollution also causes negative effects within the environment to animals and their habitats. the entrance of pollutants into waterways can have a wide range of impacts. it is possible for the pollutants to raise the temperature of the water enough to force fish out in search of cooler waters. this can itself create an ecological deadzone. water pollution can also significantly increase the rate of algal blooms. these blooms create massive fish die offs as the oxygen in the water gets depleted and the fish suffocate. fish can also be killed when excessive algae get caught in their gills. oil spills are a common occurrence throughout the world however major spills like the exxon valdez and the bp deepwater horizon disaster have shown what water pollution can do on a very large scale. it was found that dolphins have been dying in record numbers near the site of the bp deepwater horizon disaster. it has also been found that the oil from the bp disaster has gotten into wetlands which are considered the nursery for nearly every creature that lives in the area. the effects of water pollution are not always immediate. they arent always seen at the point of contamination. they are sometimes never known by the person responsible for the pollution. however water pollution has a huge impact on the lives of all people. with knowledge consideration and preparation water pollution can be decreased. it doesnt take much effort just a little thought. our editors will review what you ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. water pollution is the release of substances into bodies of water that makes water unsafe for human use and disrupts aquatic ecosystems. water pollution can be caused by a plethora of different contaminants including toxic waste petroleum and disease causing microorganisms. human activities that generate domestic sewage and toxic waste cause water pollution by contaminating water with disease causing microorganisms and poisonous substances. oil spills are another source of water pollution that have devastating impacts on surrounding ecosystems. sewage can promote algae growth which can eventually result in eutrophic dead zones where aquatic life can not survive because of a lack of oxygen. microplastics are often found in marine wildlife and can become concentrated in humans who consume seafood because of biomagnification. oil spills such as the deepwater horizon oil spill in strand and kill many different marine species. while some studies point to human activity as a catalyst for red tide scientists are unsure about its cause. red tide is a common term for harmful algal blooms that often poison or kill wildlife and humans who consume contaminated seafood. red tides can severely impact ecosystems and local economies. water pollution the release of substances into subsurface groundwater or into lakes streams rivers estuaries and oceans to the point where the substances interfere with beneficial use of the water or with the natural functioning of ecosystems. in addition to the release of substances such as chemicals or microorganisms water pollution may also include the release of energy in the form of radioactivity or heat into bodies of water. water bodies can be polluted by a wide variety of substances including pathogenic microorganisms putrescible organic waste plant nutrients toxic chemicals sediments heat petroleum and radioactive substances. several types of water pollutants are considered below. domestic sewage is the primary source of pathogens and putrescible organic substances. because pathogens are excreted in feces all sewage from cities and towns is likely to contain pathogens of some type potentially presenting a direct threat to public health. putrescible organic matter presents a different sort of threat to water quality. as organics are decomposed naturally in the sewage by bacteria and other microorganisms the dissolved oxygen content of the water is depleted. this endangers the quality of lakes and streams where high levels of oxygen are required for fish and other aquatic organisms to survive. sewage treatment processes reduce the levels of pathogens and organics in wastewater but they do not eliminate them completely. domestic sewage is also a major source of plant nutrients mainly nitrates and phosphates. excess nitrates and phosphates in water promote the growth of algae sometimes causing unusually dense and rapid growths known as algal blooms. when the algae die oxygen dissolved in the water declines because microorganisms use oxygen to digest algae during the process of decomposition. anaerobic organisms then metabolize the organic wastes releasing gases such as methane and hydrogen sulfide which are harmful to the aerobic forms of life. the process by which a lake changes from a clean clear conditionwith a relatively low concentration of dissolved nutrients and a balanced aquatic communityto a nutrient rich algae filled state and thence to an oxygen deficient waste filled condition is called eutrophication. eutrophication is a naturally occurring slow and inevitable process. however when it is accelerated by human activity and water pollution it can lead to the premature aging and death of a body of water. waste is considered toxic if it is poisonous radioactive explosive carcinogenic mutagenic teratogenic or bioaccumulative. sources of toxic chemicals include improperly disposed wastewater from industrial plants and chemical process facilities as well as surface runoff containing pesticides used on agricultural areas and suburban lawns. sediment resulting from soil erosion can be carried into water bodies by surface runoff. suspended sediment interferes with the penetration of sunlight and upsets the ecological balance of a body of water. also it can disrupt the reproductive cycles of fish and other forms of life and when it settles out of suspension it can smother bottom dwelling organisms. heat is considered to be a water pollutant because it decreases the capacity of water to hold dissolved oxygen in solution and it increases the rate of metabolism of fish. valuable species of game fish can not survive in water with very low levels of dissolved oxygen. a major source of heat is the practice of discharging cooling water from power plants into rivers the discharged water may be as much as c warmer than the naturally occurring water. petroleum pollution occurs when oil from roads and parking lots is carried in surface runoff into water bodies. accidental oil spills are also a source of oil pollutionas in the devastating spills from the tanker exxon valdez and from the deepwater horizon oil rig. oil slicks eventually move toward shore harming aquatic life and damaging recreation areas. groundwaterwater contained in underground geologic formations called aquifersis a source of drinking water for many people. for example about half the people in the united states depend on groundwater for their domestic water supply. although groundwater may appear crystal clear it may still be polluted by dissolved chemicals and by bacteria and viruses. sources of chemical contaminants include poorly designed or poorly maintained subsurface sewage disposal systems industrial wastes disposed of in improperly lined or unlined landfills or lagoons leachates from unlined municipal refuse landfills mining and petroleum production and leaking underground storage tanks below gasoline service stations. in coastal areas increasing withdrawal of groundwater can cause saltwater intrusion as the water table drops seawater is drawn into wells. although estuaries and oceans contain vast volumes of water their natural capacity to absorb pollutants is limited. contamination from sewage outfall pipes from dumping of sludge or other wastes and from oil spills can harm marine life especially microscopic phytoplankton that serve as food for larger aquatic organisms. sometimes unsightly and dangerous waste materials can be washed back to shore littering beaches with hazardous debris. by an estimated. million and. million tonnes of plastic debris had been dumped into the oceans annually and floating plastic waste had accumulated in earth s five subtropical gyres that cover percent of the world s oceans. another ocean pollution problem is the seasonal formation of dead zones in certain coastal areas. the cause is nutrient enrichment from dispersed agricultural runoff and concomitant algal blooms. dead zones occur worldwide one of the largest of these forms annually in the gulf of mexico beginning at the mississippi river delta. water pollutants come from either point sources or dispersed sources. a point source is a pipe or channel such as those used for discharge from an industrial facility or a city sewerage system. a dispersed source is a very broad unconfined area from which a variety of pollutants enter the water body such as the runoff from an agricultural area. point sources of water pollution are easier to control than dispersed sources because the contaminated water has been collected and conveyed to one single point where it can be treated. pollution from dispersed sources is difficult to control and despite much progress in the building of modern sewage treatment plants dispersed sources continue to cause a large fraction of water pollution problems. although pure water is rarely found in nature the characterization of water quality is a function of the intended use of the water. for example water that is clean enough for swimming and fishing may not be clean enough for drinking and cooking. water quality standards provide a legal framework for the prevention of water pollution of all types. there are several types of water quality standards. stream standards are those that classify streams rivers and lakes on the basis of their maximum beneficial use they set allowable levels of specific substances or qualities allowed in those bodies of water based on their given classification. effluent standards set specific limits on the levels of contaminants allowed in the final discharges from wastewater treatment plants. drinking water standards include limits on the levels of specific contaminants allowed in potable water delivered to homes for domestic use. in the united states the clean water act and its amendments regulate water quality and set minimum standards for waste discharges for each industry as well as regulations for specific problems such as toxic chemicals and oil spills. in the european union water quality is governed by the water framework directive the drinking water directive and other laws. humans are increasingly influencing the climate and the earths temperature by burning fossil fuels cutting down forests and farming livestock. this adds enormous amounts of greenhouse gases to those naturally occurring in the atmosphere increasing the greenhouse effect and global warming. the main driver of climate change is the greenhouse effect. some gases in the earths atmosphere act a bit like the glass in a greenhouse trapping the suns heat and stopping it from leaking back into space and causing global warming. many of these greenhouse gases occur naturally but human activity is increasing the concentrations of some of them in the atmosphere in particular co produced by human activities is the largest contributor to global warming. by its concentration in the atmosphere had risen to above its pre industrial level. other greenhouse gases are emitted by human activity in smaller quantities. methane is a more powerful greenhouse gas than co but has a shorter atmospheric lifetime. nitrous oxide like co is a long lived greenhouse gas that accumulates in the atmosphere over decades to centuries. natural causes such as changes in solar radiation or volcanic activity are estimated to have contributed less than plus or minus. c to total warming between and. was the warmest decade recorded with global average temperature reaching. c above pre industrial levels in. human induced global warming is presently increasing at a rate of. c per decade. an increase of compared to the temperature in pre industrial times is associated with serious negative impacts on to the natural environment and human health and wellbeing including a much higher risk that dangerous and possibly catastrophic changes in the global environment will occur. for this reason the international community has recognised the need to keep warming well below and pursue efforts to limit it to. c. share this page models that account only for the effects of natural processes are not able to explain the warming observed over the past century. models that also account for the greenhouse gases emitted by humans are able to explain this warming. click the image to view a larger version. earths temperature depends on the balance between energy entering and leaving the planets system. when incoming energy from the sun is absorbed by the earth system earth warms. when the suns energy is reflected back into space earth avoids warming. when absorbed energy is released back into space earth cools. many factors both natural and human can cause changes in earths energy balance including these factors have caused earths climate to change many times. scientists have pieced together a record of earths climate dating back hundreds of thousands of years by analyzing a number of indirect measures of climate such as ice cores tree rings glacier lengths pollen remains and ocean sediments and by studying changes in earths orbit around the sun. this record shows that the climate system varies naturally over a wide range of time scales. in general climate changes prior to the industrial revolution in the s can be explained by natural causes such as changes in solar energy volcanic eruptions and natural changes in greenhouse gas concentrations. recent climate changes however can not be explained by natural causes alone. research indicates that natural causes do not explain most observed warming especially warming since the mid century. rather it is extremely likely that human activities have been the dominant cause of that warming. top of pageradiative forcing is a measure of the influence of a particular factor on the net change in earths energy balance. on average a positive radiative forcing tends to warm the surface of the planet while a negative forcing tends to cool the surface. ghgs have a positive forcing because they absorb energy radiating from earths surface rather than allowing it to be directly transmitted into space. this warms the atmosphere like a blanket. aerosols or small particles can have a positive or negative radiative forcing depending on how they absorb and emit heat or reflect light. for example black carbon aerosols have a positive forcing since they absorb sunlight. sulfate aerosols have a negative forcing since they reflect sunlight back into space. noaas annual ghg index which tracks changes in radiative forcing from ghgs over time shows that such forcing from human added ghgs has increased. percent between and. increases in co in the atmosphere are responsible for of the increase. the contribution to radiative forcing by ch and cfcs has been nearly constant or declining respectively in recent years. when sunlight reaches earths surface it can either be reflected back into space or absorbed by earth. once absorbed the planet releases some of the energy back into the atmosphere as heat. greenhouse gases like water vapor carbon dioxide and methane absorb energy slowing or preventing the loss of heat to space. in this way ghgs act like a blanket making earth warmer than it would otherwise be. this process is commonly known as the greenhouse effect. over the last several hundred thousand years co levels varied in tandem with the glacial cycles. during warm interglacial periods co levels were higher. during cool glacial periods co levels were lower. the heating or cooling of earths surface and oceans can cause changes in the natural sources and sinks of these gases and thus change greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. these changing concentrations are thought to have acted as a positive feedback amplifying the temperature changes caused by long term shifts in earths orbit. estimates of the earth s changing co concentration and antarctic temperature based on analysis of ice core data extending back years. until the past century natural factors caused atmospheric co concentrations to vary within a range of about to parts per million by volume. warmer periods coincide with periods of relatively high co concentrations. note the past century s temperature changes and rapid co rise are not shown here. increases over the past half century are shown in the recent role section. click the image to view a larger version. source based on data appearing in nrc. climate feedbacks amplify or reduce direct warming and cooling effects. they do not change the planets temperature directly. feedbacks that amplify changes are called positive feedbacks. feedbacks that counteract changes are called negative feedbacks. feedbacks are associated with changes in surface reflectivity clouds water vapor and the carbon cycle. water vapor appears to cause the most important positive feedback. as earth warms the rate of evaporation and the ability of air to hold water vapor both rise increasing the amount of water vapor in the air. because water vapor is a greenhouse gas this leads to further warming. the melting of arctic sea ice is another example of a positive climate feedback. as temperatures rise sea ice retreats. the loss of ice exposes the underlying sea surface which is darker and absorbs more sunlight than ice increasing the total amount of warming. some types of clouds cause a negative feedback. warming temperatures can increase the amount or reflectivity of these clouds reflecting more sunlight back into space cooling the surface of the planet. other types of clouds however contribute a positive feedback. there are also several positive feedbacks that increase ghg concentrations. for example as temperatures warm these changes lead to higher concentrations of atmospheric ghgs and contribute to increased warming. since the industrial revolution began around human activities have contributed substantially to climate change by adding co and other heat trapping gases to the atmosphere. these greenhouse gas emissions have increased the greenhouse effect and caused earths surface temperature to rise. the primary human activity affecting the amount and rate of climate change is greenhouse gas emissions from the burning of fossil fuels. the most important ghgs directly emitted by humans include carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide and several others. the sources and recent trends of these gases are detailed below. carbon dioxide is the primary greenhouse gas that is contributing to recent climate change. co is absorbed and emitted naturally as part of the carbon cycle through plant and animal respiration volcanic eruptions and ocean atmosphere exchange. human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels and changes in land use release large amounts of co causing concentrations in the atmosphere to rise. atmospheric co concentrations have increased by more than since pre industrial times from approximately parts per million by volume in the century to over ppmv in. the monthly average concentration at mauna loa now exceeds ppmv for the first time in human history. the current co level is higher than it has been in at least years. some volcanic eruptions released large quantities of co in the distant past. however the u. s. geological survey reports that human activities now emit more than times as much co as volcanoes each year. human activities currently release over billion tons of co into the atmosphere every year. the resultant build up of co in the atmosphere is like a tub filling with water where more water flows from the faucet than the drain can take away. for more information on the human and natural sources and sinks of co emissions and actions that can reduce emissions see the carbon dioxide page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. methane is produced through both natural and human activities. for example natural wetlands agricultural activities and fossil fuel extraction and transport all emit ch. methane is more abundant in earths atmosphere now than at any time in at least the past years. due to human activities ch concentrations increased sharply during most of the century and are now more than two and a half times pre industrial levels. in recent decades the rate of increase has slowed considerably. for more information on ch emissions and sources and actions that can reduce emissions see epas methane page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. for information on how methane is impacting the arctic see the epa report methane and black carbon impacts on the arctic. nitrous oxide is produced through natural and human activities mainly through agricultural activities and natural biological processes. fuel burning and some other processes also create no. concentrations of no have risen approximately since the start of the industrial revolution with a relatively rapid increase toward the end of the century. overall no concentrations have increased more rapidly during the past century than at any time in the past years. for more information on no emissions and sources and actions that can reduce emissions see epas nitrous oxide page in the greenhouse gas emissions website. for more information on greenhouse gas emissions see the greenhouse gas emissions website including an expanded discussion of global warming potentials and how they are used to measure the relative strengths of greenhouse gases. to learn more about actions that can reduce these emissions see what you can do. particles and aerosols in the atmosphere can also affect climate. human activities such as burning fossil fuels and biomass contribute to emissions of these substances although some aerosols also come from natural sources such as volcanoes and marine plankton. for more information on greenhouse gas emissions see the greenhouse gas emissions website. to learn more about actions that can reduce these emissions see what epa is doing and what you can do. top of pagethe sun s energy received at the top of earth s atmosphere has been measured by satellites since. it has followed its natural year cycle of small ups and downs but with no net increase. over the same period global temperature has risen markedly. click the image to view a larger version. source usgcrp. climate is influenced by natural changes that affect how much solar energy reaches earth. these changes include changes within the sun and changes in earths orbit. changes occurring in the sun itself can affect the intensity of the sunlight that reaches earths surface. the intensity of the sunlight can cause either warming or cooling. the sun follows a natural year cycle of small ups and downs in intensity but the effect on earths climate is small. changes in the shape of earths orbit as well as the tilt and position of earths axis can also affect the amount of sunlight reaching earths surface. changes in the suns intensity have influenced earths climate in the past. for example the so called little ice age between the and centuries may have been partially caused by a low solar activity phase from to which coincided with cooler temperatures. the little ice age refers to a slight cooling of north america europe and probably other areas around the globe. changes in earths orbit have had a big impact on climate over tens to hundreds of thousands of years. in fact the amount of summer sunshine on the northern hemisphere which is affected by changes in the planets orbit appears to drive the advance and retreat of ice sheets. these changes appear to be the primary cause of past cycles of ice ages in which earth has experienced long periods of cold temperatures as well as shorter interglacial periods of relatively warmer temperatures. click to learn about how rates of climate change have varied over time. changes in solar energy continue to affect climate. however over the last year solar cycle solar output has been lower than it has been since the mid century and therefore does not explain the recent warming of the earth. similarly changes in the shape of earths orbit as well as the tilt and position of earths axis affect temperature on very long timescales and therefore can not explain the recent warming. when sunlight reaches earth it can be reflected or absorbed. the amount that is reflected or absorbed depends on earths surface and atmosphere. light colored objects and surfaces like snow and clouds tend to reflect most sunlight while darker objects and surfaces like the ocean forests or soil tend to absorb more sunlight. the term albedo refers to the amount of solar radiation reflected from an object or surface often expressed as a percentage. earth as a whole has an albedo of about meaning that of the sunlight that reaches the planet is absorbed. absorbed sunlight warms earths land water and atmosphere. reflectivity is also affected by aerosols. aerosols are small particles or liquid droplets in the atmosphere that can absorb or reflect sunlight. unlike greenhouse gases the climate effects of aerosols vary depending on what they are made of and where they are emitted. those aerosols that reflect sunlight such as particles from volcanic eruptions or sulfur emissions from burning coal have a cooling effect. those that absorb sunlight such as black carbon have a warming effect. natural changes in reflectivity like the melting of sea ice have contributed to climate change in the past often acting as feedbacks to other processes. volcanoes have played a noticeable role in climate. volcanic particles that reach the upper atmosphere can reflect enough sunlight back to space to cool the surface of the planet by a few tenths of a degree for several years. these particles are an example of cooling aerosols. volcanic particles from a single eruption do not produce long term change because they remain in the atmosphere for a much shorter time than ghgs. human changes in land use and land cover have changed earths reflectivity. processes such as deforestation reforestation desertification and urbanization often contribute to changes in climate in the places they occur. these effects may be significant regionally but are smaller when averaged over the entire globe. in addition human activities have generally increased the number of aerosol particles in the atmosphere. overall human generated aerosols have a net cooling effect offsetting about one third of the total warming effect associated with human greenhouse gas emissions. reductions in overall aerosol emissions can therefore lead to more warming. however targeted reductions in black carbon emissions can reduce warming. top of page usgcrp. climate change impacts in the united states the third national climate assessment. richmond and gary w. yohe eds. u. s. global change research program. ipcc. climate change the physical science basis. contribution of working group i to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. cambridge university press cambridge united kingdom and new york ny usa. nrc. advancing the science of climate changes. national research council. the national academies press washington dc usa. top of pagestudies of earths past climate suggest periods of relative stability as well as periods of rapid change. periods of relative stability interglacial climate periods such as the present tend to be more stable than cooler glacial climates. for example earths climate during the current interglacial period is more stable than the most recent glacial period. the glacial period was characterized by widespread large and abrupt climate changes. in contrast the previous interglacial period was similarly stable. periods of abrupt climate change abrupt climate change refers to sudden large changes in some major component of the climate system with rapid widespread effects. abrupt or rapid climate changes tend to frequently accompany transitions between glacial and interglacial periods. for example a significant part of the northern hemisphere particularly around greenland may have experienced very rapid warming of f f over several decades during and after the most recent ice age. abrupt climate changes occur when a threshold or tipping point in the climate system is crossed causing large changes or impacts to the climate. scientific data show that abrupt changes in climate at the regional scale have occurred throughout history and are characteristic of earths climate system. warming from greenhouse gas emissions as well as other human changes to the earth system may increase the possibility of large and abrupt regional or global climatic events. contact us to ask a question provide feedback or report a problem. last updated on december ontemporary climate change includes both the global warming caused by humans and its impacts on earths weather patterns. there have been previous periods of climate change but the current changes are more rapid than any known events in earths history. the main cause is the emission of greenhouse gases mostly carbon dioxide and methane. burning fossil fuels for energy use creates most of these emissions. agriculture steel making cement production and forest loss are additional sources. temperature rise is also affected by climate feedbacks such as the loss of sunlight reflecting snow cover and the release of carbon dioxide from drought stricken forests. collectively these amplify global warming. on land temperatures have risen about twice as fast as the global average. deserts are expanding while heat waves and wildfires are becoming more common. increased warming in the arctic has contributed to melting permafrost glacial retreat and sea ice loss. higher temperatures are also causing more intense storms and other weather extremes. in places such as coral reefs mountains and the arctic many species are forced to relocate or become extinct as their environment changes. climate change threatens people with food and water scarcity increased flooding extreme heat more disease and economic loss. it can also drive human migration. the world health organization calls climate change the greatest threat to global health in the century. even if efforts to minimise future warming are successful some effects will continue for centuries. these include sea level rise and warmer more acidic oceans. many of these impacts are already felt at the current level of warming which is about. c. the intergovernmental panel on climate change projects even greater impacts as warming continues to. c and beyond. additional warming also increases the risk of triggering tipping points such as the melting of the greenland ice sheet. responding to these changes involves taking actions to limit the amount of warming and adapting to them. future warming can be reduced by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and removing them from the atmosphere. this will involve using more wind and solar energy phasing out coal and increasing energy efficiency. switching to electric vehicles to public transport and to heat pumps for homes and commercial buildings would further limit emissions. prevention of deforestation and enhancing forests can help absorb co. some communities may adapt to climate change through better coastline protection disaster management and development of more resistant crops. by themselves these efforts to adapt can not avert the risk of severe widespread and permanent impacts. under the paris agreement nations collectively agreed to keep warming well under c through mitigation efforts. however with pledges made under the agreement global warming would still reach about. c by the end of the century. limiting warming to. c would require halving emissions by and achieving net zero emissions by. before the s it was unclear whether warming by greenhouse gases would dominate aerosol induced cooling. scientists then often used the term inadvertent climate modification to refer to the human impact on the climate. in the s the terms global warming and climate change were popularised. the former refers only to increased surface warming the latter describes the full effect of greenhouse gases on the climate. global warming became the most popular term after nasa climate scientist james hansen used it in his testimony in the u. s. senate. in the s the term climate change increased in popularity. global warming usually refers to human induced warming of the earth system whereas climate change can refer to natural or anthropogenic change. the two terms are often used interchangeably. various scientists politicians and media figures have adopted the terms climate crisis or climate emergency to talk about climate change and global heating instead of global warming. the policy editor in chief of the guardian said they included this language in their editorial guidelines to ensure that we are being scientifically precise while also communicating clearly with readers on this very important issue. in oxford languages chose climate emergency as its word of the year defining it as a situation in which urgent action is required to reduce or halt climate change and avoid potentially irreversible environmental damage resulting from it. multiple independent instrumental datasets show that the climate system is warming. the decade warmed. c compared to the pre industrial baseline. surface temperatures are rising by about. c per decade with reaching a temperature of. c above pre industrial. since the number of cold days and nights has decreased and the number of warm days and nights has increased. there was little net warming between the century and the mid century. climate information for that period comes from climate proxies such as trees and ice cores. they show that natural variations offset the early effects of the industrial revolution. thermometer records began to provide global coverage around. historical patterns of warming and cooling like the medieval climate anomaly and the little ice age did not occur at the same time across different regions. temperatures may have reached as high as those of the late century in a limited set of regions. there have been prehistorical episodes of global warming such as the paleoceneeocene thermal maximum. however the modern observed rise in temperature and co concentrations has been so rapid that even abrupt geophysical events in earths history do not approach current rates. evidence of warming from air temperature measurements are reinforced with a wide range of other observations. there has been an increase in the frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation melting of snow and land ice and increased atmospheric humidity. flora and fauna are also behaving in a manner consistent with warming for instance plants are flowering earlier in spring. another key indicator is the cooling of the upper atmosphere which demonstrates that greenhouse gases are trapping heat near the earths surface and preventing it from radiating into space. regions warm at various rates. the pattern is independent of where greenhouse gases are emitted because the gases persist long enough to diffuse across the planet. since the pre industrial period the average surface temperature over land regions has increased almost twice as fast as the global average surface temperature. this is because of the larger heat capacity of oceans and because oceans lose more heat by evaporation. the thermal energy in the global climate system has grown with only brief pauses since at least and over of this extra energy has been stored in the ocean. the rest has heated the atmosphere melted ice and warmed the continents. the northern hemisphere and the north pole have warmed much faster than the south pole and southern hemisphere. the northern hemisphere not only has much more land but also more seasonal snow cover and sea ice. as these surfaces flip from reflecting a lot of light to being dark after the ice has melted they start absorbing more heat. local black carbon deposits on snow and ice also contribute to arctic warming. arctic temperatures are increasing at over twice the rate of the rest of the world. melting of glaciers and ice sheets in the arctic disrupts ocean circulation including a weakened gulf stream further changing the climate. the climate system experiences various cycles on its own which can last for years decades or even centuries. other changes are caused by an imbalance of energy that is external to the climate system but not always external to the earth. examples of external forcings include changes in the concentrations of greenhouse gases solar luminosity volcanic eruptions and variations in the earths orbit around the sun. to determine the human contribution to climate change known internal climate variability and natural external forcings need to be ruled out. a key approach is to determine unique fingerprints for all potential causes then compare these fingerprints with observed patterns of climate change. for example solar forcing can be ruled out as a major cause. its fingerprint would be warming in the entire atmosphere. yet only the lower atmosphere has warmed consistent with greenhouse gas forcing. attribution of recent climate change shows that the main driver is elevated greenhouse gases but that aerosols also have a strong effect. the earth absorbs sunlight then radiates it as heat. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb and reemit infrared radiation slowing the rate at which it can pass through the atmosphere and escape into space. before the industrial revolution naturally occurring amounts of greenhouse gases caused the air near the surface to be about c warmer than it would have been in their absence. while water vapour and clouds are the biggest contributors to the greenhouse effect they increase as a function of temperature and are therefore feedbacks. on the other hand concentrations of gases such as co tropospheric ozone cfcs and nitrous oxide are not temperature dependent and are therefore external forcings. human activity since the industrial revolution mainly extracting and burning fossil fuels has increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere resulting in a radiative imbalance. in the concentrations of co and methane had increased by about and respectively since. these co levels are higher than they have been at any time during the last million years. concentrations of methane are far higher than they were over the last years. global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in excluding those from land use change were equivalent to billion tonnes of co. of these emissions was co was methane was nitrous oxide and was fluorinated gases. co emissions primarily come from burning fossil fuels to provide energy for transport manufacturing heating and electricity. additional co emissions come from deforestation and industrial processes which include the co released by the chemical reactions for making cement steel aluminum and fertiliser. methane emissions come from livestock manure rice cultivation landfills wastewater and coal mining as well as oil and gas extraction. nitrous oxide emissions largely come from the microbial decomposition of inorganic and organic fertiliser. from a production standpoint the primary sources of global greenhouse gas emissions are estimated as electricity and heat agriculture and forestry industry and manufacturing transport and buildings. despite the contribution of deforestation to greenhouse gas emissions the earths land surface particularly its forests remain a significant carbon sink for co. natural processes such as carbon fixation in the soil and photosynthesis more than offset the greenhouse gas contributions from deforestation. the land surface sink is estimated to remove about of annual global co emissions. the ocean also serves as a significant carbon sink via a two step process. first co dissolves in the surface water. afterwards the oceans overturning circulation distributes it deep into the oceans interior where it accumulates over time as part of the carbon cycle. over the last two decades the worlds oceans have absorbed to of emitted co. air pollution in the form of aerosols not only puts a large burden on human health but also affects the climate on a large scale. from to a gradual reduction in the amount of sunlight reaching the earths surface was observed a phenomenon popularly known as global dimming typically attributed to aerosols from biofuel and fossil fuel burning. globally aerosols have been declining since meaning that they no longer mask greenhouse gas warming as much. aerosols scatter and absorb solar radiation. they also have indirect effects on the earths radiation budget. sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets. these clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets. they also reduce the growth of raindrops which makes clouds more reflective to incoming sunlight. indirect effects of aerosols are the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing. while aerosols typically limit global warming by reflecting sunlight black carbon in soot that falls on snow or ice can contribute to global warming. not only does this increase the absorption of sunlight it also increases melting and sea level rise. limiting new black carbon deposits in the arctic could reduce global warming by. c by. humans change the earths surface mainly to create more agricultural land. today agriculture takes up of earths land area while is forests and is uninhabitable. the amount of forested land continues to decrease largely due to conversion to cropland in the tropics. this deforestation is the most significant aspect of land surface change affecting global warming. the main causes of deforestation are permanent land use change from forest to agricultural land producing products such as beef and palm oil logging to produce forestry forest products short term shifting cultivation and wildfires. land use changes not only affect greenhouse gas emissions. the type of vegetation in a region affects the local temperature. it impacts how much of the sunlight gets reflected back into space and how much heat is lost by evaporation. for instance the change from a dark forest to grassland makes the surface lighter causing it to reflect more sunlight. deforestation can also affect temperatures by modifying the release of chemical compounds that influence clouds and by changing wind patterns. in tropic and temperate areas the net effect is to produce significant warming while at latitudes closer to the poles a gain of albedo leads to a cooling effect. globally these effects are estimated to have led to a slight cooling dominated by an increase in surface albedo. physical climate models are unable to reproduce the rapid warming observed in recent decades when taking into account only variations in solar output and volcanic activity. as the sun is the earths primary energy source changes in incoming sunlight directly affect the climate system. solar irradiance has been measured directly by satellites and indirect measurements are available from the early s onwards. there has been no upward trend in the amount of the suns energy reaching the earth. further evidence for greenhouse gases causing global warming comes from measurements that show a warming of the lower atmosphere coupled with a cooling of the upper atmosphere. if solar variations were responsible for the observed warming the troposphere and stratosphere would both warm. explosive volcanic eruptions represent the largest natural forcing over the industrial era. when the eruption is sufficiently strong sunlight can be partially blocked for a couple of years. the temperature signal lasts about twice as long. in the industrial era volcanic activity has had negligible impacts on global temperature trends. present day volcanic co emissions are equivalent to less than of current anthropogenic co emissions. the response of the climate system to an initial forcing is modified by feedbacks increased by self reinforcing feedbacks and reduced by balancing feedbacks. the main reinforcing feedbacks are the water vapour feedback the icealbedo feedback and probably the net effect of clouds. the primary balancing mechanism is radiative cooling as earths surface gives off more heat to space in response to rising temperature. in addition to temperature feedbacks there are feedbacks in the carbon cycle such as the fertilizing effect of co on plant growth. uncertainty over feedbacks is the major reason why different climate models project different magnitudes of warming for a given amount of emissions. as air gets warmer it can hold more moisture. after initial warming due to emissions of greenhouse gases the atmosphere will hold more water. water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas so this further heats the atmosphere. if cloud cover increases more sunlight will be reflected back into space cooling the planet. if clouds become higher and thinner they act as an insulator reflecting heat from below back downwards and warming the planet. overall the net cloud feedback over the industrial era has probably exacerbated temperature rise. the reduction of snow cover and sea ice in the arctic reduces the albedo of the earths surface. more of the suns energy is now absorbed in these regions contributing to amplification of arctic temperature changes. arctic amplification is also melting permafrost which releases methane and co into the atmosphere. around half of human caused co emissions have been absorbed by land plants and by the oceans. on land elevated co and an extended growing season have stimulated plant growth. climate change increases droughts and heat waves that inhibit plant growth which makes it uncertain whether this carbon sink will continue to grow in the future. soils contain large quantities of carbon and may release some when they heat up. as more co and heat are absorbed by the ocean it acidifies its circulation changes and phytoplankton takes up less carbon decreasing the rate at which the ocean absorbs atmospheric carbon. climate change can increase methane emissions from wetlands marine and freshwater systems and permafrost. future warming depends on the strengths of climate feedbacks and on emissions of greenhouse gases. the former are often estimated using climate models developed by multiple scientific institutions. a climate model is a representation of the physical chemical and biological processes that affect the climate system. models include changes in the earths orbit historical changes in the suns activity and volcanic forcing. computer models attempt to reproduce and predict the circulation of the oceans the annual cycle of the seasons and the flows of carbon between the land surface and the atmosphere. models project different future temperature rises for given emissions of greenhouse gases they do not fully agree on the strength of different feedbacks on climate sensitivity and magnitude of inertia of the climate system. the physical realism of models is tested by examining their ability to simulate contemporary or past climates. past models have underestimated the rate of arctic shrinkage and underestimated the rate of precipitation increase. sea level rise since was underestimated in older models but more recent models agree well with observations. the united states published national climate assessment notes that climate models may still be underestimating or missing relevant feedback processes. a subset of climate models add societal factors to a simple physical climate model. these models simulate how population economic growth and energy use affect and interact with the physical climate. with this information these models can produce scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions. this is then used as input for physical climate models to generate climate change projections. in some scenarios emissions continue to rise over the century while others have reduced emissions. fossil fuel resources are too abundant for shortages to be relied on to limit carbon emissions in the century. emissions scenarios can be combined with modelling of the carbon cycle to predict how atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases might change in the future. according to these combined models by the atmospheric concentration of co could be as low as or as high as ppm depending on the socioeconomic scenario and the mitigation scenario. the ipcc sixth assessment report projects that global warming is very likely to reach. c to. c by the late century under the very low ghg emissions scenario. in an intermediate scenario global warming would reach. c to. c and. c to. c under the very high ghg emissions scenario. these projections are based on climate models in combination with observations. the remaining carbon budget is determined by modelling the carbon cycle and the climate sensitivity to greenhouse gases. according to the ipcc global warming can be kept below. c with a two thirds chance if emissions after do not exceed or gigatonnes of co. this corresponds to to years of current emissions. there are high uncertainties about the budget. for instance it may be gigatonnes of co smaller due to methane release from permafrost and wetlands. the environmental effects of climate change are broad and far reaching affecting oceans ice and weather. changes may occur gradually or rapidly. evidence for these effects comes from studying climate change in the past from modelling and from modern observations. since the s droughts and heat waves have appeared simultaneously with increasing frequency. extremely wet or dry events within the monsoon period have increased in india and east asia. the rainfall rate and intensity of hurricanes and typhoons is likely increasing. frequency of tropical cyclones has not increased as a result of climate change. global sea level is rising as a consequence of glacial melt melt of the ice sheets in greenland and antarctica and thermal expansion. between and the rise increased over time averaging.. mm per year. over the century the ipcc projects that in a very high emissions scenario the sea level could rise by cm. increased ocean warmth is undermining and threatening to unplug antarctic glacier outlets risking a large melt of the ice sheet and the possibility of a meter sea level rise by under high emissions. climate change has led to decades of shrinking and thinning of the arctic sea ice. while ice free summers are expected to be rare at. c degrees of warming they are set to occur once every three to ten years at a warming level of c. higher atmospheric co concentrations have led to changes in ocean chemistry. an increase in dissolved co is causing oceans to acidify. in addition oxygen levels are decreasing as oxygen is less soluble in warmer water. dead zones in the ocean regions with very little oxygen are expanding too. the greater the amount of global warming the greater the risk of passing through tipping points thresholds beyond which certain impacts can no longer be avoided even if temperatures are reduced. an example is the collapse of west antarctic and greenland ice sheets where a temperature rise of. to c may commit the ice sheets to melt although the time scale of melt is uncertain and depends on future warming. some large scale changes could occur over a short time period such as a collapse of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation which would trigger major climate changes in the north atlantic europe and north america. the long term effects of climate change include further ice melt ocean warming sea level rise and ocean acidification. on the timescale of centuries to millennia the magnitude of climate change will be determined primarily by anthropogenic co emissions. this is due to cos long atmospheric lifetime. oceanic co uptake is slow enough that ocean acidification will continue for hundreds to thousands of years. these emissions are estimated to have prolonged the current interglacial period by at least years. sea level rise will continue over many centuries with an estimated rise of. metres per degree celsius after years. recent warming has driven many terrestrial and freshwater species poleward and towards higher altitudes. higher atmospheric co levels and an extended growing season have resulted in global greening. however heatwaves and drought have reduced ecosystem productivity in some regions. the future balance of these opposing effects is unclear. climate change has contributed to the expansion of drier climate zones such as the expansion of deserts in the subtropics. the size and speed of global warming is making abrupt changes in ecosystems more likely. overall it is expected that climate change will result in the extinction of many species. the oceans have heated more slowly than the land but plants and animals in the ocean have migrated towards the colder poles faster than species on land. just as on land heat waves in the ocean occur more frequently due to climate change harming a wide range of organisms such as corals kelp and seabirds. ocean acidification makes it harder for organisms such as mussels barnacles and corals to produce shells and skeletons and heatwaves have bleached coral reefs. harmful algal blooms enhanced by climate change and eutrophication lower oxygen levels disrupt food webs and cause great loss of marine life. coastal ecosystems are under particular stress. almost half of global wetlands have disappeared due to climate change and other human impacts. ecological collapse. bleaching has damaged the great barrier reef and threatens reefs worldwide. extreme weather. drought and high temperatures worsened the bushfires in australia. arctic warming. permafrost thaws undermine infrastructure and release methane a greenhouse gas. habitat destruction. many arctic animals rely on sea ice which has been disappearing in a warming arctic. pest propagation. mild winters allow more pine beetles to survive to kill large swaths of forest. the effects of climate change on humans mostly due to warming and shifts in precipitation have been detected worldwide. impacts are now observable on all continents and across ocean regions with low latitude less developed areas facing the greatest risk. continued warming has potentially severe pervasive and irreversible impacts for people and ecosystems. the risks are unevenly distributed but are generally greater for disadvantaged people in developing and developed countries. health impacts include both the direct effects of extreme weather leading to injury and loss of life and indirect effects such as undernutrition brought on by crop failures. various infectious diseases are more easily transmitted in a warmer climate such as dengue fever which affects children most severely and malaria. young children are the most vulnerable to food shortages and together with older people to extreme heat. the world health organization has estimated that between and climate change is expected to cause around additional deaths per year from heat exposure in elderly people increases in diarrheal disease malaria dengue coastal flooding and childhood undernutrition. over additional adult deaths are projected yearly by due to reductions in food availability and quality. other major health risks associated with climate change include air and water quality. the who has classified human impacts from climate change as the greatest threat to global health in the century. climate change is affecting food security. it has caused reduction in global mean yields of maize wheat and soybeans between and. future warming could further reduce global yields of major crops. crop production will probably be negatively affected in low latitude countries while effects at northern latitudes may be positive or negative. up to an additional million people worldwide particularly those with lower incomes are at risk of hunger as a consequence of these impacts. the effects of warming on the oceans impact fish stocks with a global decline in the maximum catch potential. only polar stocks are showing an increased potential. regions dependent on glacier water regions that are already dry and small islands are at increased risk of water stress due to climate change. economic damages due to climate change may be severe and there is a probability of disastrous tail risk events. climate change has likely already increased global economic inequality and this trend is projected to continue. most of the severe impacts are expected in sub saharan africa and south east asia where existing poverty is already exacerbated. the world bank estimates that climate change could drive over million people into poverty by. current inequalities between men and women between rich and poor and between different ethnicities have been observed to worsen as a consequence of climate variability and climate change. an expert elicitation concluded that the role of climate change in armed conflict has been small compared to factors such as socio economic inequality and state capabilities but that future warming will bring increasing risks. low lying islands and coastal communities are threatened through hazards posed by sea level rise such as flooding and permanent submergence. this could lead to statelessness for populations in island nations such as the maldives and tuvalu. in some regions rise in temperature and humidity may be too severe for humans to adapt to. with worst case climate change models project that almost one third of humanity might live in extremely hot and uninhabitable climates similar to the current climate found in the sahara. these factors plus weather extremes can drive environmental migration both within and between countries. displacement of people is expected to increase as a consequence of more frequent extreme weather sea level rise and conflict arising from increased competition over natural resources. climate change may also increase vulnerability leading to trapped populations who are not able to move due to a lack of resources. environmental migration. sparser rainfall leads to desertification that harms agriculture and can displace populations. shown telly mali. agricultural changes. droughts rising temperatures and extreme weather negatively impact agriculture. shown texas us. tidal flooding. sea level rise increases flooding in low lying coastal regions. shown venice italy. storm intensification. bangladesh after cyclone sidr is an example of catastrophic flooding from increased rainfall. heat wave intensification. events like the june european heat wave are becoming more common. climate change can be mitigated by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and by enhancing sinks that absorb greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. in order to limit global warming to less than. c with a high likelihood of success global greenhouse gas emissions needs to be net zero by or by with a c target. this requires far reaching systemic changes on an unprecedented scale in energy land cities transport buildings and industry. the united nations environment programme estimates that countries need to triple their pledges under the paris agreement within the next decade to limit global warming to c. an even greater level of reduction is required to meet the. c goal. with pledges made under the agreement as of october global warming would still have a chance of reaching about. c by the end of the century. although there is no single pathway to limit global warming to. or c most scenarios and strategies see a major increase in the use of renewable energy in combination with increased energy efficiency measures to generate the needed greenhouse gas reductions. to reduce pressures on ecosystems and enhance their carbon sequestration capabilities changes would also be necessary in agriculture and forestry such as preventing deforestation and restoring natural ecosystems by reforestation. other approaches to mitigating climate change have a higher level of risk. scenarios that limit global warming to. c typically project the large scale use of carbon dioxide removal methods over the century. there are concerns though about over reliance on these technologies and environmental impacts. solar radiation management is also a possible supplement to deep reductions in emissions. however srm would raise significant ethical and legal issues and the risks are poorly understood. renewable energy is key to limiting climate change. fossil fuels accounted for of the worlds energy in. the remaining share was split between nuclear power and renewables. that mix is projected to change significantly over the next years. solar and wind have seen substantial growth and progress over the last few years. solar panels and onshore wind are the cheapest forms of adding new power generation capacity in most countries. renewables represented of all new electricity generation installed in nearly all solar and wind. meanwhile nuclear power share remains the same but costs are increasing. nuclear power generation is now several times more expensive per megawatt hour than wind and solar. to achieve carbon neutrality by renewable energy would become the dominant form of electricity generation rising to or more by in some scenarios. the use of electricity for heating and transport would rise to the point where electricity becomes the largest form of energy. investment in coal would be eliminated and coal use nearly phased out by. in transport scenarios envision sharp increases in the market share of electric vehicles of public transport and of a switch to low carbon fuel for other transportation modes like shipping. heating would be increasingly decarbonised with the use of technologies like heat pumps. there are obstacles to the continued rapid growth of renewables. for solar and wind power a key challenge is their intermittency and seasonal variability. traditionally hydro dams with reservoirs and conventional power plants have been used when variable energy production is low. intermittency is further countered by expanding battery storage and matching energy demand and supply. long distance transmission can smooth variability of renewable output across wider geographic areas. there can be environmental and land use concerns with large solar and wind projects while bioenergy is often not carbon neutral and may have negative consequences for food security. hydropower growth has been slowing and is set to decline further due to concerns about social and environmental impacts. low carbon energy improves human health by minimising climate change and has the near term benefit of reducing air pollution deaths which were estimated at million annually in. meeting the paris agreement goals that limit warming to a c increase could save about a million of those lives per year by whereas limiting global warming to. c could save millions and simultaneously increase energy security and reduce poverty. reducing energy demand is another major aspect of reducing emissions. if less energy is needed there is more flexibility for clean energy development. it also makes it easier to manage the electricity grid and minimises carbon intensive infrastructure development. major increases in energy efficiency investment will be required to achieve climate goals comparable to the level of investment in renewable energy. several covid related changes in energy use patterns energy efficiency investments and funding have made forecasts for this decade more difficult and uncertain. strategies to reduce energy demand vary by sector. in transport passengers and freight can switch to more efficient travel modes such as buses and trains or use electric vehicles. industrial strategies to reduce energy demand include increasing the energy efficiency of heating systems and motors designing less energy intensive products and increasing product lifetimes. in the building sector the focus is on better design of new buildings and aiming for higher levels of energy efficiency in retrofitting. the use of technologies like heat pumps can also increase building energy efficiency. agriculture and forestry face a triple challenge of limiting greenhouse gas emissions preventing the further conversion of forests to agricultural land and meeting increases in world food demand. a set of actions could reduce agriculture and forestry based emissions by two thirds from levels. these include reducing growth in demand for food and other agricultural products increasing land productivity protecting and restoring forests and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural production. steel and cement production responsible for about of industrial co emissions present particular challenges. in these industries carbon intensive materials such as coke and lime play an integral role in the production so that reducing co emissions requires research into alternative chemistries. natural carbon sinks can be enhanced to sequester significantly larger amounts of co beyond naturally occurring levels. reforestation and tree planting on non forest lands are among the most mature sequestration techniques although the latter raises food security concerns. soil carbon sequestration and coastal carbon sequestration are less understood options. the feasibility of land based negative emissions methods for mitigation are uncertain the ipcc has described mitigation strategies based on them as risky. where energy production or co intensive heavy industries continue to produce waste co the gas can be captured and stored instead of released to the atmosphere. although its current use is limited in scale and expensive carbon capture and storage may be able to play a significant role in limiting co emissions by mid century. this technique in combination with bio energy can result in net negative emissions co is drawn from the atmosphere. it remains highly uncertain whether carbon dioxide removal techniques such as beccs will be able to play a large role in limiting warming to. c. policy decisions that rely on carbon dioxide removal increase the risk of global warming rising beyond international goals. adaptation is the process of adjustment to current or expected changes in climate and its effects. without additional mitigation adaptation can not avert the risk of severe widespread and irreversible impacts. more severe climate change requires more transformative adaptation which can be prohibitively expensive. the capacity and potential for humans to adapt is unevenly distributed across different regions and populations and developing countries generally have less. the first two decades of the century saw an increase in adaptive capacity in most low and middle income countries with improved access to basic sanitation and electricity but progress is slow. many countries have implemented adaptation policies. however there is a considerable gap between necessary and available finance. adaptation to sea level rise consists of avoiding at risk areas learning to live with increased flooding and protection. if that fails managed retreat may be needed. there are economic barriers for tackling dangerous heat impact. avoiding strenuous work or having air conditioning is not possible for everybody. in agriculture adaptation options include a switch to more sustainable diets diversification erosion control and genetic improvements for increased tolerance to a changing climate. insurance allows for risk sharing but is often difficult to get for people on lower incomes. education migration and early warning systems can reduce climate vulnerability. ecosystems adapt to climate change a process that can be supported by human intervention. by increasing connectivity between ecosystems species can migrate to more favourable climate conditions. species can also be directly moved. protection and restoration of natural and semi natural areas helps build resilience making it easier for ecosystems to adapt. many of the actions that promote adaptation in ecosystems also help humans adapt via ecosystem based adaptation. for instance restoration of natural fire regimes makes catastrophic fires less likely and reduces human exposure. giving rivers more space allows for more water storage in the natural system reducing flood risk. restored forest acts as a carbon sink but planting trees in unsuitable regions can exacerbate climate impacts. there are synergies and trade offs between adaptation and mitigation. adaptation often offer short term benefits whereas mitigation has longer term benefits. increased use of air conditioning allows people to better cope with heat but increases energy demand. compact urban development may lead to reduced emissions from transport and construction. at the same time it may increase the urban heat island effect leading to higher temperatures and increased exposure. increased food productivity has large benefits for both adaptation and mitigation. countries that are most vulnerable to climate change have typically been responsible for a small share of global emissions. this raises questions about justice and fairness. climate change is strongly linked to sustainable development. limiting global warming makes it easier to achieve sustainable development goals such as eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities. the connection is recognised in sustainable development goal which is to ake urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. the goals on food clean water and ecosystem protection have synergies with climate mitigation. the geopolitics of climate change is complex. it has often been framed as a free rider problem in which all countries benefit from mitigation done by other countries but individual countries would lose from switching to a low carbon economy themselves. this framing has been challenged. for instance the benefits of a coal phase out to public health and local environments exceed the costs in almost all regions. furthermore net importers of fossil fuels win economically from switching to clean energy causing net exporters to face stranded assets fossil fuels they can not sell. a wide range of policies regulations and laws are being used to reduce emissions. as of carbon pricing covers about of global greenhouse gas emissions. carbon can be priced with carbon taxes and emissions trading systems. direct global fossil fuel subsidies reached billion in and. trillion when indirect costs such as air pollution are priced in. ending these can cause a reduction in global carbon emissions and a reduction in air pollution deaths. subsidies could be used to support the transition to clean energy instead. more direct methods to reduce greenhouse gases include vehicle efficiency standards renewable fuel standards and air pollution regulations on heavy industry. several countries require utilities to increase the share of renewables in power production. policy designed through the lens of climate justice tries to address human rights issues and social inequality. for instance wealthy nations responsible for the largest share of emissions would have to pay poorer countries to adapt. as the use of fossil fuels is reduced jobs in the sector are being lost. to achieve a just transition these people would need to be retrained for other jobs. communities with many fossil fuel workers would need additional investments. nearly all countries in the world are parties to the united nations framework convention on climate change. the goal of the unfccc is to prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system. as stated in the convention this requires that greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilised in the atmosphere at a level where ecosystems can adapt naturally to climate change food production is not threatened and economic development can be sustained. the unfccc does not itself restrict emissions but rather provides a framework for protocols that do. global emissions have risen since the unfccc was signed. its yearly conferences are the stage of global negotiations. the kyoto protocol extended the unfccc and included legally binding commitments for most developed countries to limit their emissions. during the negotiations the g pushed for a mandate requiring developed countries to the lead in reducing their emissions since developed countries contributed most to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. per capita emissions were also still relatively low in developing countries and developing countries would need to emit more to meet their development needs. theopenhagen accord has been widely portrayed as disappointing because of its low goals and was rejected by poorer nations including the g. associated parties aimed to limit the global temperature rise to below c. the accord set the goal of sending billion per year to developing countries for mitigation and adaptation by and proposed the founding of the green climate fund. as of the fund has failed to reach its expected target and risks a shrinkage in its funding. in all un countries negotiated the paris agreement which aims to keep global warming well below. c and contains an aspirational goal of keeping warming under. c. the agreement replaced the kyoto protocol. unlike kyoto no binding emission targets were set in the paris agreement. instead a set of procedures was made binding. countries have to regularly set ever more ambitious goals and reevaluate these goals every five years. the paris agreement restated that developing countries must be financially supported. as of october states and the european union have signed the treaty and states and the eu have ratified or acceded to the agreement. the montreal protocol an international agreement to stop emitting ozone depleting gases may have been more effective at curbing greenhouse gas emissions than the kyoto protocol specifically designed to do so. the kigali amendment to the montreal protocol aims to reduce the emissions of hydrofluorocarbons a group of powerful greenhouse gases which served as a replacement for banned ozone depleting gases. this made the montreal protocol a stronger agreement against climate change. in the united kingdom parliament became the first national government to declare a climate emergency. other countries and jurisdictions followed suit. that same year the european parliament declared a climate and environmental emergency. the european commission presented its european green deal with the goal of making the eu carbon neutral by. major countries in asia have made similar pledges south korea and japan have committed to become carbon neutral by and china by. in the european commission released its fit for legislation package which contains guidelines for the car industry all new cars on the european market must be zero emission vehicles from. while india has strong incentives for renewables it also plans a significant expansion of coal in the country. as of based on information from national climate plans which represent of the parties to the paris agreement estimated total greenhouse gas emissions will be. lower compared to levels below the or reduction goals to limit global warming to. c or c respectively. there is a near complete scientific consensus that the climate is warming and that this is caused by human activities. agreement in recent literature reached over. older surveys found to of climate scientists agreeing on humanitys role in causing climate change based on the exact question and who responded. no scientific body of national or international standing disagrees with this view. consensus has further developed that some form of action should be taken to protect people against the impacts of climate change. national science academies have called on world leaders to cut global emissions. scientific discussion takes place in journal articles that are peer reviewed. scientists assess these every few years in the intergovernmental panel on climate change reports. the ipcc assessment report stated that it is unequivocal that climate change is caused by humans. climate change came to international public attention in the late s. due to confusing media coverage in the early s people often confounded climate change with other environmental issues like ozone depletion. in popular culture the first movie to reach a mass public on the topic was the day after tomorrow in followed a few years later by the al gore documentary an inconvenient truth. books stories and films about climate change fall under the genre of climate fiction. significant regional gender age and political differences exist in both public concern for and understanding of climate change. more highly educated people and in some countries women and younger people were more likely to see climate change as a serious threat. partisan gaps also exist in many countries and countries with high co emissions tend to be less concerned. views on causes of climate change vary widely between countries. concern has increased over time to the point where a majority of citizens in many countries now express a high level of worry about climate change or view it as a global emergency. higher levels of worry are associated with stronger public support for policies that address climate change. public debate about climate change has been strongly affected by climate change denial and misinformation which originated in the united states and has since spread to other countries particularly canada and australia. the actors behind climate change denial form a well funded and relatively coordinated coalition of fossil fuel companies industry groups conservative think tanks and contrarian scientists. like the tobacco industry before the main strategy of these groups has been to manufacture doubt about scientific data and results. many who deny dismiss or hold unwarranted doubt about the scientific consensus on anthropogenic climate change are labelled as climate change skeptics which several scientists have noted is a misnomer. there are different variants of climate denial some deny that warming takes place at all some acknowledge warming but attribute it to natural influences and some minimise the negative impacts of climate change. manufacturing uncertainty about the science later developed into a manufactured controversy creating the belief that there is significant uncertainty about climate change within the scientific community in order to delay policy changes. strategies to promote these ideas include criticism of scientific institutions and questioning the motives of individual scientists. an echo chamber of climate denying blogs and media has further fomented misunderstanding of climate change. climate protests have risen in popularity in the s. these protests demand that political leaders take action to prevent climate change. they can take the form of public demonstrations fossil fuel divestment lawsuits and other activities. prominent demonstrations include the school strike for climate. in this initiative young people across the globe have been protesting since by skipping school on fridays inspired by swedish teenager greta thunberg. mass civil disobedience actions by groups like extinction rebellion have protested by disrupting roads and public transport. litigation is increasingly used as a tool to strengthen climate action from public institutions and companies. activists also initiate lawsuits which target governments and demand that they take ambitious action or enforce existing laws on climate change. lawsuits against fossil fuel companies generally seek compensation for loss and damage. in the s joseph fourier proposed the greenhouse effect to explain why earths temperature was higher than the suns energy alone could explain. earths atmosphere is transparent to sunlight so sunlight reaches the surface where it is converted to heat. however the atmosphere is not transparent to heat radiating from the surface and captures some of that heat which warms the planet. in eunice newton foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air and the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide. she concluded that an atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature... starting in john tyndall established that nitrogen and oxygentogether totalling of dry airare transparent to radiated heat. however water vapour and some gases absorb radiated heat and re radiate that heat within the atmosphere. tyndall proposed that changes in the concentrations of these gases may have caused climatic changes in the past including ice ages. svante arrhenius noted that water vapour in air continuously varied but the co concentration in air was influenced by long term geological processes. at the end of an ice age warming from increased co levels would increase the amount of water vapour amplifying warming in a feedback loop. in he published the first climate model of its kind showing that halving of co levels could have produced the drop in temperature initiating the ice age. arrhenius calculated the temperature increase expected from doubling co to be around c. other scientists were initially sceptical and believed the greenhouse effect to be saturated so that adding more co would make no difference. they thought climate would be self regulating. from onwards guy stewart callendar published evidence that climate was warming and co levels rising but his calculations met the same objections. in the s gilbert plass created a detailed computer model that included different atmospheric layers and the infrared spectrum. this model predicted that increasing co levels would cause warming. around the same time hans suess found evidence that co levels had been rising and roger revelle showed that the oceans would not absorb the increase. the two scientists subsequently helped charles keeling to begin a record of continued increase which has been termed the keeling curve. scientists alerted the public and the dangers were highlighted at james hansensongressional testimony. the intergovernmental panel on climate change set up in to provide formal advice to the worlds governments spurred interdisciplinary research. ar working group ii reportjump to navigation the natural resources defense council works to safeguard the earth its people its plants and animals and the natural systems on which all life depends. a since the industrial revolution the global annual temperature has increased in total by a little more than degree celsius or about degrees fahrenheit. between the year that accurate recordkeeping beganand it rose on average by. degrees celsius every years. since however the rate of increase has more than doubled for the last years we ve seen the global annual temperature rise by. degrees celsius or. degrees fahrenheit per decade. the result a planet that has never been hotter. nine of the warmest years since have occurred since and the warmest years on record have all occurred since. climate change deniers have argued that there has been a pause or a slowdown in rising global temperatures but numerous studies including a paper published in the journal environmental research letters have disproved this claim. the impacts of global warming are already harming people around the world. now climate scientists have concluded that we must limit global warming to. degrees celsius by if we are to avoid a future in which everyday life around the world is marked by its worst most devastating effects the extreme droughts wildfires floods tropical storms and other disasters that we refer to collectively as climate change. these effects are felt by all people in one way or another but are experienced most acutely by the underprivileged the economically marginalized and people of color for whom climate change is often a key driver of poverty displacement hunger and social unrest. a global warming occurs when carbon dioxide and other air pollutants collect in the atmosphere and absorb sunlight and solar radiation that have bounced off the earth s surface. normally this radiation would escape into space but these pollutants which can last for years to centuries in the atmosphere trap the heat and cause the planet to get hotter. these heat trapping pollutantsspecifically carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide water vapor and synthetic fluorinated gasesare known as greenhouse gases and their impact is called the greenhouse effect. though natural cycles and fluctuations have caused the earth s climate to change several times over the last years our current era of global warming is directly attributable to human activityspecifically to our burning of fossil fuels such as coal oil gasoline and natural gas which results in the greenhouse effect. in the united states the largest source of greenhouse gases is transportation followed closely by electricity production and industrial activity. curbing dangerous climate change requires very deep cuts in emissions as well as the use of alternatives to fossil fuels worldwide. the good news is that countries around the globe have formally committedas part of the paris climate agreementto lower their emissions by setting new standards and crafting new policies to meet or even exceed those standards. the not so good news is that we re not working fast enough. to avoid the worst impacts of climate change scientists tell us that we need to reduce global carbon emissions by as much as percent by. for that to happen the global community must take immediate concrete steps to decarbonize electricity generation by equitably transitioning from fossil fuelbased production to renewable energy sources like wind and solar to electrify our cars and trucks and to maximize energy efficiency in our buildings appliances and industries. a scientists agree that the earth s rising temperatures are fueling longer and hotter heat waves more frequent droughts heavier rainfall and more powerful hurricanes. in for example scientists concluded that a lengthy drought in californiathe state s worst water shortage in yearshad been intensified by to percent by global warming. they also said the odds of similar droughts happening in the future had roughly doubled over the past century. and in the national academies of science engineering and medicine announced that we can now confidently attribute some extreme weather events like heat waves droughts and heavy precipitation directly to climate change. the earth s ocean temperatures are getting warmer toowhich means that tropical storms can pick up more energy. in other words global warming has the ability to turn a category storm into a more dangerous category storm. in fact scientists have found that the frequency of north atlantic hurricanes has increased since the early s as has the number of storms that reach categories and. the atlantic hurricane season included a record breaking tropical storms major hurricanes and hurricanes altogether. with increased intensity come increased damage and death. the united states saw an unprecedented weather and climate disasters that caused at least a billion dollars worth of damage in but was the costliest on record and among the deadliest as well taken together that years tropical storms caused nearly billion in damage and led to more than fatalities. the impacts of global warming are being felt everywhere. extreme heat waves have caused tens of thousands of deaths around the world in recent years. and in an alarming sign of events to come antarctica has lost nearly four trillion metric tons of ice since the s. the rate of loss could speed up if we keep burning fossil fuels at our current pace some experts say causing sea levels to rise several meters in the next to years and wreaking havoc on coastal communities worldwide. a each year scientists learn more about the consequences of global warming and each year we also gain new evidence of its devastating impact on people and the planet. as the heat waves droughts and floods associated with climate change become more frequent and more intense communities suffer and death tolls rise. if we re unable to reduce our emissions scientists believe that climate change could lead to the deaths of more than people around the globe every year and force million people into poverty by. global warming is already taking a toll on the united states. and if we aren t able to get a handle on our emissions here s just a smattering of what we can look forward to though everyone is affected by climate change not everyone is affected equally. indigenous people people of color and the economically marginalized are typically hit the hardest. inequities built into our housing health care and labor systems make these communities more vulnerable to the worst impacts of climate changeeven though these same communities have done the least to contribute to it. a in recent years china has taken the lead in global warming pollution producing about percent of all co emissions. the united states comes in second. despite making up just percent of the world s population our nation produces a sobering percent of all global co emissionsnearly as much as the european union and india combined. and america is still number one by far in cumulative emissions over the past years. as a top contributor to global warming the united states has an obligation to help propel the world to a cleaner safer and more equitable future. our responsibility matters to other countries and it should matter to us too. a we ve started. but in order to avoid the worsening effects of climate change we need to do a lot moretogether with other countriesto reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and transition to clean energy sources. under the administration of president donald trump the united states withdrew from the paris climate agreement rolled back or eliminated dozens of clean air protections and opened up federally managed lands including culturally sacred national monuments to fossil fuel development. although president biden has pledged to get the country back on track years of inaction during and before the trump administrationand our increased understanding of global warming s serious impactsmean we must accelerate our efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. despite the lack of cooperation from the trump administration local and state governments made great strides during this period through efforts like the american cities climate challenge and ongoing collaborations like the regional greenhouse gas initiative. meanwhile industry and business leaders have been working with the public sector creating and adopting new clean energy technologies and increasing energy efficiency in buildings appliances and industrial processes. today the american automotive industry is finding new ways to produce cars and trucks that are more fuel efficient and is committing itself to putting more and more zero emission electric vehicles on the road. developers cities and community advocates are coming together to make sure that new affordable housing is built with efficiency in mind reducing energy consumption and lowering electric and heating bills for residents. and renewable energy continues to surge as the costs associated with its production and distribution keep falling. in renewable energy sources such as wind and solar provided more electricity than coal for the very first time in u. s. history. president biden has made action on global warming a high priority. on his first day in office he recommitted the united states to the paris climate agreement sending the world community a strong signal that we were determined to join other nations in cutting our carbon pollution to support the shared goal of preventing the average global temperature from rising more than. degrees celsius above preindustrial levels. and significantly the president has assembled a climate team of experts and advocates who have been tasked with pursuing action both abroad and at home while furthering the cause of environmental justice and investing in nature based solutions. a no while we can t win the fight without large scale government action at the national level we also can t do it without the help of individuals who are willing to use their voices hold government and industry leaders to account and make changes in their daily habits. wondering how you can be a part of the fight against global warming reduce your own carbon footprint by taking a few easy steps make conserving energy a part of your daily routine and your decisions as a consumer. when you shop for new appliances like refrigerators washers and dryers look for products with the government s energy star label they meet a higher standard for energy efficiency than the minimum federal requirements. when you buy a car look for one with the highest gas mileage and lowest emissions. you can also reduce your emissions by taking public transportation or carpooling when possible. and while new federal and state standards are a step in the right direction much more needs to be done. voice your support of climate friendly and climate change preparedness policies and tell your representatives that equitably transitioning from dirty fossil fuels to clean power should be a top prioritybecause it s vital to building healthy more secure communities. you don t have to go it alone either. movements across the country are showing how climate action can build community be led by those on the front lines of its impacts and create a future that s equitable and just for all. demand climate actionlearn morethis story was originally published on march and has been updated with new information and links. nrdc. org stories are available for online republication by news media outlets or nonprofits under these conditions the writer must be credited with a byline you must note prominently that the story was originally published by nrdc. org and link to the original the story can not be edited you can t resell the story in any form or grant republishing rights to other outlets you can t republish our material wholesale or automaticallyyou need to select stories individually you cant republish the photos or graphics on our site without specific permission you should drop us a note to let us know when you ve used one of our stories. it s urgent. it s ambitious. but most of all it s totally doable. the western city of ahmedabad is preparing residents to cope with the longer and more intense heat waves sweeping across south asiaand inspiring other indian cities and states to follow suit. by increasing the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere we re amplifying the planet s natural greenhouse effect and turning up the dial on global warming. the most widespread damaging storms on earth are getting worse and climate change is a big reason why. here s a look at what causes hurricanes and how to address the threat of a wetter windier world. the u. n. report warns that dire impacts from climate change will arrive sooner than many expected. here s why we need to follow the report s advice and why every ton of emissions reductions can make a difference. healing the planet starts at homein your garage in your kitchen and at your dining room table. short answer yes. even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet. what is your city doing about climate change ask your local leaders these five questions. how smog soot greenhouse gases and other top air pollutants are affecting the planetand your health. as temperatures and carbon levels rise even breathing has become a challenge. here s what you can do to help clear the air. nrdc senior attorney ben longstreth explains how plaintiffs for these cases get chosenand how you can help advance the cause in or out of the courtroom. gun control activists want to use financial levers to curtail firearm sales. can we do the same for carbon emissions when you sign up youll become a member of nrdcs activist network. we will keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports. natural resources defense council privacy policystate disclosurestogether for the environment. human healthwe all drink water that comes from a source this may be a lake or local river. in countries that have poor screening and purification practices people often get water borne disease outbreaks such as cholera and tuberculosis. every year there are an estimated million cholera cases and deaths due to cholera. in developed countries even where there are better purification methods people still suffer from the health effects of water pollution. take toxins emitted by algae growth for instance this can cause stomach aches and rashes. excess nitrogen in drinking water also poses serious risks to infants. epa s nationallakes assessment found that almost per cent of the nation s lakes have high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus pollution. the report also showed that poor lake conditions related to nitrogen or phosphorus pollution doubled the likelihood of poor ecosystem health.. ecosystemsnutrient pollution from upstream often flow downhill and even travel miles into other larger water bodies. the effect is that it breeds algae growth and causes the growth of many more water organism. this algae attack affects fish and other aquatic animals by absorbing and reducing their oxygen supply. algae growth also clogs fish gills. naturally the order of ecosystems in that water are affected negatively as the destruction or introduction of any foreign organism alter the entire food chain in there.. death of animalsanimals including water animals die when water is poisoned for various reasons. other animals are stressed and their populations are endangered. in a classic case of marine pollution in recent time miles of a us coastline was affected by an oil spill. that water pollution caused a lot of damage and deaths of many animals. over animals were reported dead just months after the spill including many that are already on the endangered species list. immediate impact on the wildlife includes oil coated birds and sea turtles mammal ingestion of oil and dead or dying deep sea coral. animals are also affected by solid waste thrown into water bodies as they harm them in many ways.. economic costfrom the above it is evident that there is some real financial implications that will result from water pollution. it can cost a lot more to purify drinking water that takes its source from nutrient polluted water bodies. fishing stock is affected negatively when there is a depletion of oxygen. consumers are also wary of fish from these sources and tend to stay away from them costing fisheries to lose revenue. in places where there are water activities or sports lots of money is spent to clean up the water from algae blooms and the like. the u. s. tourism industry loses close to billion each year mostly from losses in fishing and recreational activities because of nutrient polluted water bodies. in mississippi alone tourism in the three counties that border the gulf coast accounts for about. billion in visitor expenditures percent of state travel and tourism tax revenues and direct jobs. imagine this picture unep reports that around the world onethis is the idea of not making too much wasteconsidering the threats facing ecosystems we can begin to appreciateas long as humans live there will be the needopen access is an initiative that aims to make scientific research freely available to all. to date our community has made over million downloads. it s based on principles of collaboration unobstructed discovery and most importantly scientific progression. as phd students we found it difficult to access the research we needed so we decided to create a new open access publisher that levels the playing field for scientists across the world. how by making research easy to access and puts the academic needs of the researchers before the business interests of publishers. we are a community of more than authors and editors from institutions spanning countries including nobel prize winners and some of the world s most cited researchers. publishing on intechopen allows authors to earn citations and find new collaborators meaning more people see your work not only from your own field of study but from other related fields too. brief introduction to this section that descibes open access especially from an intechopen perspectivewant to get in touch contact our london head office or media team hereour team is growing all the time so we re always on the lookout for smart people who want to help us reshape the world of scientific publishing. open access peer reviewed chapterby inyinbor adejumoke a. adebesin babatunde o. oluyori abimbola p. adelani akande tabitha a. dada adewumi o. and oreofe toyin a. submitted april reviewed october published march doi. intechopen. home books water challenges of an urbanizing worlddownloaded the stress on our water environment as a result of increased industrialization which aids urbanization is becoming very high thus reducing the availability of clean water. polluted water is of great concern to the aquatic organism plants humans and climate and indeed alters the ecosystem. the preservation of our water environment which is embedded in sustainable development must be well driven by all sectors. while effective wastewater treatment has the tendency of salvaging the water environment integration of environmental policies into the actor firms core objectives coupled with continuous periodical enlightenment on the present and future consequences of environmental water pollution will greatly assist in conserving the water environment. address all correspondence to inyinbor. adejumoke landmarkuniversity. edu. ngdoi. intechopen. water challenges of an urbanizing worldedited by matja glavanindustrialization in any society is a major initiator of development and urbanization. although the merits of industrialization are innumerable it has been identified as a major threat to the environment as it releases various toxic chemicals gases solid wastes as well as microbes of various kinds into our immediate environmentland air and water. of particular interest is water pollution which has become a global challenge developing nations being highly affected due to their drive for development. pollution of our water bodies poses a great threat to humans and the aquatic ecosystem while marked population increase catalyzes climatic changes. for instance various human activities as well as the release of greenhouse gases by industries greatly contributes to global warming planet temperature enhancement and lowering of atmospheric air quality. the drive for sustainable development must bring along water pollution prevention techniques. effective wastewater treatment before their eventual discharge is one way to driving water pollution prevention. some remediate climate change mitigation measures against water pollution can also be explored. this chapter is aimed at critically discussing water pollution effects viz a viz global challenges threat and climatic impacts while also focusing on various possible preventive measures. sustainable development in any society is an access to initiate a good standard of living for the populace. it aims at providing solutions to the economic environmental and societal challenges without posing a threat to human and environmental future development that is we must consider the future as we make present decisions. also these include social progress and equality environmental protection conservation of natural resources and stable economic growth. there are numerous instances where urbanization has destroyed the environment and threatened its survival chances. sustainable development put into consideration how we survive in the natural world protecting it from destruction and damages. one of the major challenges of urbanization is sustainability as most developed or developing society now revitalizes a lot of natural resources daily. most of these resources meet the needs of man but they are also limited. sustainable development tends to balance the competing needs of the society. in achieving this many science bodies and institutions have seen the requisite of sustainable development and have set goals and targets to meet it. this also has pushed such institutions to have a role in measuring and monitoring the impact of these goals on the society. however the contribution of scientist in sustainable development should not only focus on the environment. it should also take into consideration the health of the populace in ensuring that no area of life suffers. while sustainable development may mean different things to different people environmental sustainability is all encompassing. it is directly concerned with the future of humanity and it defines how we should protect and handle the sustainability of resources air quality water quality and ecosystems. it also helps to prevent the environment from impending damage from technological advancement. one way to achieving environmental sustainability is via effective wastewater treatment. various conventional wastewater treatment methods are available their characteristics vary from complexities of operations through sludge generations among other things to various inadequacies. their economic disadvantages are widely related to expensive equipment complexities of operations and skilful manpower requirement. many industries avoid the conventional wastewater treatment methods due to their economic disadvantages hence discharging untreated or fairly treated wastewater into the water bodies. a simple and cheap wastewater treatment method will therefore facilitate effective wastewater treatment and protect the water environment from pollution. water is an essential and general need of life with an undeniable effect directly or indirectly. all industrial environmental and metabolic processes are water dependent. in living organisms water plays a number of roles such as solvent temperature buffer metabolite living environment and lubricants. water however is said to be polluted when some of the water quality parameters have been hampered by unguided and irregularities from several anthropogenic activities thus rendering water unfit for intended use. water pollution may pose serious threat to the environment as well as lives. pollutant effects may vary depending on their types and source. for instance while heavy metals dyes and some other organic pollutants have been identified as carcinogens hormones pharmaceuticals and cosmetics and personal care product wastes are known as endocrine disruptive chemicals. these pollutants which enter into the water body through various channel but predominantly anthropogenic have become a great concern to environmentalists due to various hazard they pose on the environment. heavy metals top the list of inorganic pollutant with wide range of negative effects on aquatic organisms plants and human. heavy metals are released into the environment via different routes such as industries mining activities agricultural activities etc.. bioavailable metals present in the soil may be absorbed by plants resulting in serious plant metabolism dysfunctioning. high heavy metal ion concentrations are also known to damage the cell membrane affect enzyme involved in chlorophyll production thus reducing photosynthetic rate as well as affect plant reproduction via decrease in pollen and seed viability. humans and animals can be exposed to heavy metal toxicity through the food web direct consumption of water containing metal or via inhalation. heavy metals readily bioaccumulates in vegetables and enters into man and animal through food chain. effects of heavy metal toxicity on human ranges from mild eye nose and skin irritations through severe headache stomach ache diarrhea hematemesis vomiting dizziness to organ dysfunctioning such as cirrhosis necrosis low blood pressure hypertension and gastrointestinal distress. while some heavy metals also called essential elements are required in minute amount in the body for various biochemical processes others such as lead cadmium arsenic and mercury are of serious threat and considered foreign in the body. looking at specifics human ingestion of water polluted with arsenic can cause cancer of the lungs liver and bladder. kidney and lungs damage as well as bone fragility may result when cadmium containing water is ingested. exposure to lead can severely damage the brain and kidneys. in children lead exposure even at very low concentration may hamper learning cause memory loss affect attention and response functions and generally make children aggressive. in pregnant women high levels of exposure to lead may cause miscarriage whereas in men it can damage the organs responsible for sperm production. mercury is unique amidst other heavy metals it has the capacity to travel a wide range of distance thus have been classified as a global pollutants. the chemical form of mercury in the environment is also important in analyzing their toxicity. the organic form of mercury that is methyl mercury and dimethyl mercury is known to be more toxic than inorganic mercury. while inhaled mercury goes into the blood stream their elimination from the body is either through the urine or faeces. mercury has the ability to exist in the urine for about months hence their renal dysfunctioning characteristic. many physiological disorders may accompany crustaceans exposure to metals and instant metabolic activities alterations. exposure of crustaceans to heavy metals may also result in loss of appetite for food and subsequently body weight loss. continuous exposure may reduce reproduction in adults as well as hamper the growth larvae. organic pollutants are very wide in variety with a huge range of toxicity. among the list of organic pollutants that has been of great threat to aquatic organisms plants and humans are dyes plant and animal pharmaceuticals personal care products wastes as well as petroleum organic pollutants. a group of chemicals referred to as endocrine disruptive chemicals also belongs to the organic pollutants group which are classed as emerging contaminants. edcs are described as external agents that interfere with hormonal activities thus affecting the normal homeostatic reproduction development or behavior. dyes are water soluble giant chemical that is greatly used in many industries viz textile leather and tanning food paper etc. to impact color on products. aquatic organisms plants and humans are greatly affected by dyes presence in water. they impede sunlight penetration into water bodies and reduce dissolved oxygen thus leading to death of photosynthetic organism and other lives within the aquatic environment. humans may be exposed to dye toxicity via consumption of vegetables and fish which bioaccumulate dyes. the use of colored paper towels used in drying hands and in food preparation is another route of exposure to human. dyes are considered as carcinogenic and mutagenic thus their removal from wastewater before disposal is ultimately important. human and veterinary pharmaceuticals which are members of edcs are chemicals used as curative or preventive of various diseases. veterinary pharmaceutical may also serve the purpose of increasing efficiency of food production. pharmaceuticals are used widely and unavoidably thus they enter into the environment through one of these routes indiscriminate disposal of hospital and household waste landfill leaching drainage water and sewage. although pharmaceuticals have been found to exist in various environmental samples at the ng l to g l levels it is considered a great threat to both aquatic lives and humans. the presence of pharmaceuticals in water is known to pose both acute and chronic toxicity on aquatic organisms. edcs as their name implies causes abnormal endocrine activities and increase cancer risk in human. their effects on aquatic lives may range from endocrine system disruption through the reduction in eggs and sperm cells production to feminization of female aquatics. water is one important part of our day to day activities and their preservation can never be overemphasized. three quarter of the fluid in man is made of water and it forms the essential medium in which the biochemical reactions take place in human body. water moves blood from one place to the other in the body and helps in digestion electrically charged ions which generate nerve signals that make the human brain possible are also held and transported by water. water is a good solvent and it is usually referred to as universal solvent all the major components in cells that is protein deoxyribonucleic acid and polysaccharides are all soluble in water. pure water is tasteless odorless and transparent and thus provides a habitat for aquatic plants and organisms because sunlight can reach them within the water. though clean water is a vital commodity for the well being of human but unfortunately the availability of fresh water is unevenly distributed and greatly threatened where available due to problems associated with climate change inefficient water management and pollution. recent report says very high percentage of the world population still lacks water for human well being and ecosystem conservation. the world is faced with the dilemma of achieving balance between economic development and sustainable natural environment. effective wastewater treatment has been earlier identified a way of protecting the water environment with detailed discussion on effective cheap and accessible method of wastewater treatment. various other methods of water purification such as forward and or reverse osmosis precipitations coagulation filtrations modular anaerobic system microbial fuel cell and advanced oxidation process with their attendant challenges have been reported in literature. various environmental policies stipulating discharge protocols exists. these policies are however not effectively executed as the industries consider them as damaging to business. the ability of industries to run with the various environmental discharge policies will sustain our natural environment. policy integration that is factoring environmental issues of concern into the core of economic development is highly important to facilitate policy performance. the main actors in environmental issues that is the industries agro firms and populace show very little understanding of the impact of their activities on the present and future environment. while organized periodical training concerning environmental sustainability should form part of environmental policy objectives ensuring that these objectives are integrated into sectors plains and policies is important. drinking water supplied to our communities is usually sourced from rivers springs and underground sources. usually some form of treatment is carried out to ensure the water is fit for drinking although some sources are somewhat free from contaminating microorganism and can be clean for example deep well. in many developing countries one source of water can serve many uses such as drinking washing swimming bathing etc. in the same vein sewage can be channeled into water bodies. sewage can be defined as used water draining out of homes and industries that contain a wide range of debris chemicals and microorganisms. such water is regarded as potential health hazard to consumers or the users of other sort. a major kind of hazard is the presence of pathogenic organisms in such water. this is why water is usually treated in three phases. the first is to separate large matter in the water source and the second stage focuses on removing more toxic substances and other matter. the tertiary phase involves total purification of water commonly by chemical disinfection. more recently membrane bioreactors are being used and have been found to be very efficient in removing contaminants. these are combinations of communities and high efficiency membranes that are much more effective at removing contaminants. the role of microbes is obvious in the second stage where microorganisms actively carry out biodegradation of organic matter in the aqueous portion produced after the first stage. biodegradation of materials such as paper and petroleum are by bacteria algae and protozoa. when water is exposed to air soil as well as effluents it gains saprobic microorganisms it can also pick up pathogens such as cryptosporidium campylobacter salmonella shigella etc. to monitor water for each of these pathogens may not be possible but detection of fecal contamination is an easier way of spotting contamination. in such case when the fecal contamination is high pathogens are believed to be present and the water is unsafe for drinking. hence indicator organisms are used as tools to detect fecal contamination of water. they usually inhabit the intestine of mammals and birds and can be easily identified using common laboratory procedures. to achieve water protection it will be almost impossible to search for the pathogens themselves. hence certain organisms with specified criteria are used as indicators of the presence of enteric pathogens in a water sample. an indicator bacterium should be applicable for analysis of all types of water it should be found anytime enteric pathogens are present and it should thrive in the wastewater longer than the toughest enteric pathogen. in addition such organism should not reproduce in the contaminated water because this will give exaggerated values and it should not be harmful to human begins. other criteria are that the level of contamination should be directly proportional to the level of fecal contamination assay procedure for the indicator organism should be highly specific and the test procedure should be easily performed. the following are commonly used as indicators of fecal contamination in water total coliforms escherichia coli fecal coliforms fecal streptococci enterococci coliphage and clostridium perfringens. coliforms are members of the family enterobacteriaceae. they are facultative anaerobic gram negative nonsporing rod shaped bacteria that ferment lactose with gas formation within hours at. microbial contamination of water can be detected by checking for certain organisms including heterotrophic bacteria coliforms and escherichia coliin such samples. the work by kora et al. showed that heterotrophic bacteria were in abundance in the lake water sampled. they also reported that contamination by e. coliand coliforms were beyond the allowable limit indiscriminate disposal of sewage into water as well as release of human excreta was implicated in the high level of indicator organisms. control of pathogens in water is important to prevent waterborne diseases this can be effectively done using multiple barrier approach. microbial treatment methods goes further than traditional municipal wastewater treatment because it takes into consideration the removal of nutrients and easily degradable organic compounds as well as the possible presence of toxic compounds and variations in ph of the wastewater. a more advanced design is required in the bioreactor to be used. some parameters to be considered in designing a treatment system are biomass yield nutrient addition the supply of oxygen or other electron donor ph control as well as kinetics that is biological reaction rates. it is important to note at high concentration many compounds of interest are toxic to bacteria being used for treatment. also some dissolved organic and inorganic compounds may constitute inhibitors to biodegradation by the organism. biological treatment processes may not consist of the followinglagoon treatment activated sludge as well as fixed film bioreactors. the lagoon treatment is long detention time basins but unlike activated sludge processes they do not use solid recycle. such treatment scheme may be in three categories anaerobic lagoon treatment which makes use of highly loaded lakes creating anaerobic conditions. it has been used successfully for the pretreatment of meat and poultry processing wastewater reducing the biochemical oxygen demand considerably. in the case of facultative ponds there is an aerobic surface and an anaerobic bottom. the top aerobic layer facilitates treatment of dissolved organic compounds as well as odourous compounds. this has found application in pulp and paper industries. with regards to aerated lagoons oxygen is provided by mechanical means or diffused aeration and the solids are continuously mixed and in suspension. biological oxygen demand removal may range up to. another biological treatment process of interest is the activated sludge. it is made up of an aeration basin where aeration equipment provides both oxygen and adequate mixing of wastewater to maintain a uniformly mixed liquor suspended solids. the aeration basin is followed by a liquidsolid separation usually in a clarifier by gravity and finally the settled biomass is returned again to the activated sludge basin. examples of aeration basin configurations are plug flow systems single completely mixed basins and basins in series. the solid retention time is important in this treatment process. the solid retention time is the average time biomass is maintained in a biological treatment process reaction. generally srt control is temperature dependent and for a warmer climate srt should be between and days. the clarifier is very important in the performance of activated sludge processes. it ensures that efficient clarification and thickening of mixed liquor occurs. when the readily degradable soluble biochemical oxygen demand is high in wastewaters growth of filamentous bacteria is encouraged leading to poor sludge settlement. the use of powdered activated carbon has been discovered to enhance the efficiency of activated sludge processes. the pac functions by adsorbing inhibitory chemicals or adsorbing chemicals that buffer variable loads. the application between and mg liter of wastewater has been proven to remove organic inhibitors of the process as well as improve nitrification since it absorbs organic compounds that can prevent this process in autotrophic bacteria. apart from the aforementioned anaerobic bioreactors are also beneficial for the industrial wastewater treatment. this is because it is cost effective and can be used for industrial wastewater with high strength. the processes in the anaerobic bioreactor lead to the production of mainly methane as well as other gases. however there is a need to strike a balance between fermentation bacterial activity and methanogenic bacteria activity as the latter is slow growing. advantages of anaerobic treatment include low sludge formation production of useful product low nutrient requirement and more importantly less energy requirements since aeration is not necessary. in addition to the energy production advantages of anaerobic wastewater treatment high organic matter removal efficiency low excess sludge production and stable operation are characteristics of this wastewater treatment technique. a most recent advancement in the biological treatment of wastewater is the use of membranes in bioreactors. in such cases the membrane can serve three major purposes. firstly membranes can be used as a surface for the attachment for growth of organisms and to permit oxygen to permeate into the biofilm. an example of this is the hollow fiber gas permeable membranes in wastewater treatment. such membrane is produced from microporous hydrophobic polypropylene and allows almost oxygen transfer while ensuring high biomass density within the space. the second way membranes can be used as selective barriers. such membranes permit organic compounds in wastewater to permeate but do not transport ions into the bioreactor. thus it allows for the selection of biodegradable organic compounds. an example of a material used for such membrane is silicone rubber. finally membranes can be for biomass separation. this third category requires that the membrane be used instead of a clarifier after activated sludge treatment. when such membranes are used the effluent produced is of high quality and less sludge. in addition automated processing can be easily employed. the disadvantage however is the financial enormity of the investment for initial start up as well as maintenance. since coliform bacteria are often detected in drinking water and often the source of contamination is not known it is important to put in place control measures. the water distribution systems must be considered because water quality deterioration may occur. this can be as a result of reduced maintenance of the distribution system or from insufficient treatment and may lead to undue microbial growth which the consumer may not notice. water distribution systems should be periodically flushed to remove sediments deposits as well as the growth of microorganisms within the pipe. for areas where the flow rate is low and possibly of the water becoming stale is high a secondary disinfection using monochloramine and proper maintenance should be carried out in such as to prevent nitrification. another point is to avoid a break in the distribution system especially during construction repairs or installations and cross connections. the officers should also ensure that the level of treatment a water sample is given is in conformity with the quality of the source of water. also the sampling for laboratory analysis must also be taken into consideration and monitored thoroughly when aseptic techniques are compromised detection of coliforms may occur. even though reports of water diseases have been low and less serious in most developed countries it is still a major concern in some underdeveloped countries especially war ravaged countries. it is however important to operate a multibarrier approach which will ensure protection of the water source and also certify adequate treatment and distribution of water. it is however important that every occurrence of coliforms in drinking water be properly investigated so that if the contamination is as a result of operational deficiency this can be addressed and future occurrence is prevented thus safe guarding the health of the public. several modern methods of water purification have been well embraced in our society today. however some rural dwellers who may not be able to afford these modern treatment methods still have water pollution as a major challenge. furthermore the disinfection by products which remain after treatment is another reason why herbal attempts in water treatment should be encouraged. it is important to note that not many researchers apply their antimicrobial extract or fractions directly in water treatment. many groups stop at establishing the antimicrobial potential of their study plant whereas others go further to apply the extracts in water treatment. for instance a reported work used alcoholic aqueous and fresh juice extracts of ocimum sanctum and azadirachta indica and applied them in vitro against salmonella which was chosen as an indicator organism. the alcoholic extract gave the best result for well water whereas the aqueous extract was best for lake water. similarly inspired by the fact that tulsi neem and amla are used to treat microbial infection without any side effect another researcher compared the effectiveness of these three herbs in water purification using percentage of e. coliremoval to measure the effectiveness of each herb. a notable observation is the fact that a mixture of concentration of each herb is not as efficient as the synergistic combination of the three. an indirect application of herbs in water purification is their use in the synthesis of nanoparticles which are afterwards applied to remove contaminants from water. these extracts influence the surface properties of the nanoparticles thus dictating their unique properties owing to the obvious advantages of natural disinfection there is a need for more research into natural products for water purification. this will in no small way help rural dwellers to cheaply assess cheap clean water and so live a healthier lifestyle. all organisms including man need water for their survival. water resource managers had strongly depended on wastewater treatment in ensuring that the quality of water is sustained preserved and maintained for optimal use. by an estimated around billion people out of a total population of around billion will be living in areas of water stress. one of the major environmental issues affecting humanity is the increasing worldwide contamination of freshwater systems as a consequence of industrial and chemical compound materials being emptied into their pathways runways majorly in form of micro pollutants. according to schwarzenbach et al. most of these pollutants are present at low concentrations many of them however can raise significant toxicological concerns more importantly when such compounds are present as constituents of composite blends. numerous micro pollutants had been identified in literatures which are not vulnerable to current treatment and are subsequently transported to the aquatic environment. some of these include steroid hormones pesticides industrial chemicals pharmaceuticals and many other emerging materials. this consequently endangers both the aquatic and human life. it is therefore not surprising that freshwater pollution is a strong public menace which requires global concern. the next quotation properly situates the environmental risk humans are exposed to it is in the interest of all the world that climatic changes are understood and that the risks of irreversible damage to natural systems and the threats to the very survival of man be evaluated and allayed with the greatest urgency the above quotation were the statements of the president of the republic of the maldives his excellency maumoon abdul gayoom during the united nations general assembly held in in the united states of america as adapted from the. the meeting was centered on issues of environment and development. due to climate change effect both the thermal and hydrological phases of rivers are expected to vary. owning to these it is necessary to briefly discuss what climate change is as climate change has the potential of imposing additional pressures in some regions of the world. in other to get a good grasp of what climate change is it may be better to first define climate. climate is usually narrowly defined as the average weather or broadly as the statistical description in terms of the average and variability of relevant parameters or quantities of interest over a period of time ranging from days to millions of years. most often the parameters often used are temperature precipitation wind etc. climate can therefore be generally described as a state including statistical description of the climate system. climate change on the other hand often referred to as global warming is the rise in the average temperature on the earth s surface. it is well believed that the climate change event is as a consequence of human use of fossil fuels which consequently releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the air. these gases trap heat within the earth s atmosphere and can have a variety of effects ranging from rising sea levels to severe weather events. green et al. had submitted that global climate change can include natural and anthropogenic influences on terrestrial climate and the hydrologic cycle. most notable international scientific community had actualized the reality of climate change. some of these include the national aeronautics and space administration the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and the environmental protection agency of the united states to mention a few. these agencies further reiterated that climate change is a menace created from human activity to affect human. figure adapted from world health organization geneva report revealed that all the major activities of global climatic changes eventually bore its consequence on human in general and on human health in particular. inter relationship between various kinds of environmental change. adapted from who geneva report. however pressures and anxiety on the earth s climatic system are having impacts on the surface of the earth. apart from the rising surface temperatures the activities of increasing and frequent flooding and droughts and the changes in our natural water ecosystem are other areas of great concern in the continuous existence of man on earth. according to who geneva report climatic situation and activities affect human well being both directly and indirectly. the direct influence is through the physical effects of climatic extremes whereas the indirect means include the influence on the intensities or level of pollution in the air on the marine and freshwater systems that provide food and water as well as the pathogens that cause infectious diseases. for the purpose of this section we concentrate on the climatic activities with respect to water pollution. this will lead us to the next sub section. observational records and climate projections provide abundant evidence that freshwater resources are vulnerable and have the potential to be strongly impacted by climate change with wide ranging consequences for human societies and ecosystems excerpt from the executive summary of the technical paper of the ipcc edited by bates et al. human activity affects weather climate and the environment. while some of human activities are harmless others damage the environment. while the environment can absorb some abuse without long term effects much harmful human activity exceeds the environment s capacity to recover. water pollution is one of the inevitable human induced climate change issues that called for urgent remedial measures. water pollution will in no small measure affect or alter the basic water quality parameters comprising the micro pollutants physiochemical and biological parameters. probable and incessant changes in both rainfall and air temperature has the capacity to affect river flow thereby inducing chemical reaction kinetics as well as drop in the freshwater ecological quality. associated with such process are dilution of contaminants and water sediment loads which when ran into lakes will alter its natural features and affect its inhabitants. this form of water pollution or through man made toxic chemical or and by products addition may therefore generate some toxic and greenhouse gases which may subsequently contribute to global warming activities or more severe environmental threats. the greenhouse gases are the gaseous constituents of the atmosphere which can absorb and emit radiation at certain wavelengths within the spectrum of thermal infrared radiation emitted by the earth s surface the atmosphere itself and the clouds. the primary greenhouse gases in the earth s atmosphere include carbon dioxide nitrous oxide water vapor methane and ozone. the other ones identified from the kyoto protocol include hydrofluorocarbons perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride. some of these environmental threats include earth s temperature enhancement lowering of atmospheric air quality and killing of aquatic animals. consequently given the legacy of historic greenhouse gas emissions and the prospect of inevitable climate change one can not but commit significant financial and technical resources to remediating the effect through rigorous research efforts and sensitization activities more importantly to water pollution and water related issues. thus water resources managers are continuously and increasingly looking for information on the possible changes in hydrological regimes which may arise in the next few decades for likeable adaptation measure plan. an interesting challenge is that while incessant water pollution may bring about a change in climatic conditions through greenhouse effect and activities the climate too will in turn take its toll effect on the water system and environment. this is because the higher temperature generated from the greenhouse effect will eventually turn some part of the snowfall into rainfall causing an earlier snowmelt season. these effects will consequently alter the timing and volume of spring flood appreciably. the rise in sea level during this time will then cause saline water intrusion into groundwater aquifers close to the coast thereby reducing the available groundwater resources. this process will in no small measure affect humans as almost about of the world population depends on groundwater for their various activities. mitchelle et al. using physically hydrological and water temperature modeling framework had reported an increase in the seasonality of river discharge for about of the global land coverage for the projected and modeled data for years when compared with the years spanning. they also projected a rise in temperaturerevealing a projected global change into the future. other effects of climate change on the hydrological cycle include increasing atmospheric water vapor content changes in soil moisture and runoff and changing precipitation patterns. furthermore higher temperatures of freshwater and changes in extremes including floods and droughts can also intensify many forms of water pollution. the authors also showed that water fluctuation in quantity and quality has the potential of affecting food stability and availabilityleading to a reduction in food security to vulnerable poor farmers. almost of the entire population of the earth do not have adequate access to safe water while about suffer the effects of deplorable sanitary situations. schwarzenbach et al. had submitted that the increase in surface groundwater pollution will go a long way in affecting both the human and aquatic life systems. according to schwarzenbach et al. about of the earth s available and renewable freshwater are used for industrial domestic and agricultural purposes. however if this activities are not well managed water pollution may be inevitable with different kinds of pollutants. some of the water pollutants according to the authors include industrial chemicals biocides natural chemicals industrial products as well as consumer products. industrial manufactured nanomaterials had also been found to be a major water pollutant whose effects is on the increase in affecting aquatic ecosystem. according to lapworth et al. groundwater pollution mainly results from landfill leachate infiltration of contaminated water from agricultural land groundwater surface water reaction as well as seepage of sewer systems. while some of these pollutants like heavy metals are not degraded at all some others disintegrated very slowly and can be transported to hundreds of kilometers away from the source. the effects of their waterborne pollution however ranges from contamination of drinking water causing drinking water quality problems to emission of greenhouse gases resulting in climatic change challenges. some remediate climate change mitigation measures against water pollution can however be taken. some of these include carbon dioxide capture and storage planting of bio energy crops proper solid waste disposition afforestation or reforestation cropland managementboth for water and reduced tillage among other measures. scientific researches involving water pollution should be geared more toward ascertaining the physical underlying molecular mechanisms and factors rather than just the usual empirical comparison approach that is commonly used. the mechanisms involved if well understood will go a long way in properly situating ways of combating the water pollution challenges. this according to metz and ingold may be achieved by developing a structure that addresses both the problem dimension and sustainability dimension of assessing best instruments that regulate water pollution. a sustainable working policy on water pollution should not only be designed and enacted but also rigorously followed more importantly in the developing and underdeveloped countries where the menace of water pollution has not been effectively managed. bemelmans videc had presented a classification for effectively managing water pollution. these are regulation economic instruments and information. these bemelmans videc classifications according to metz would help in differentiating source directed measures from end of pipe measures in water quality regulation. while the source directed measures help in avoiding pollution before toxic and injurious chemical materials enter into waters the end of pipe measures concentrate on filtering pollution after its input into wastewater. furthermore usage and disposal approaches should be in place with the aim of minimizing the addition of critical pollutants into aquatic environment. in addition such system specific properties and reactivities should be well understood and quantified. this kind of processes will yield a significant framework for reliable coverage and evaluation of chemical compounds in complex macroscopic ecosystems. other alternative methods for removing pollutants from waters include ozonation and advanced oxidation process coagulation flocculation membrane bioreactor pac and attached growth treatment processes. refer to the work of for comprehensive reading on the methodology and activity of each process. it can therefore be concluded that whatever form of measure taken in inhibiting both surface and groundwater will not only advance our aquatic ecosystem but will also help man from further endangering his environment from the menace of climate change. since water forms a core of the existence of human and other living things its preservation and sustainable availability can not be overemphasized. the availability of clean water is greatly threatened by various human activities and of interest is pollution which in turn affects the ecosystem and causes various climatic changes. while various wastewater treatment methods are being explored by industries and various treatment plants untreated wastewater is still being discharged into the water bodies by some industries. thus effective environmental protection policies compliance drive will be of immense benefit to the environment and by extension to human. factoring these environmental protection policies into the goals and objectives of various actors involved in environmental deterioration will help policies performance. this will serve as a step forward in the direction of ameliorating water pollution. the author. licensee intechopen. this chapter is distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution. license which permits unrestricted use distribution and reproduction in any medium provided the original work is properly cited. help us write another book on this subject and reach those readerstotal chapter downloadscrossref citationslogin to your personal dashboard for more detailed statistics on your publications. edited by matja glavanby amy y. olsen angela smith and shawn larsonedited by ismail m. m. rahmanby seyed y. s. lisar rouhollah motafakkerazad mosharraf m. hossain and ismail m. m. rahmanwe are intechopen the worlds leading publisher of open access books. built by scientists for scientists. our readership spans scientists professors researchers librarians and students as well as business professionals. we share our knowledge and peer reveiwed research papers with libraries scientific and engineering societies and also work with corporate r d departments and government entities. headquartersintechopen limited princes gate court london sw qj united kingdomphone intechopen. all rights reserved. empty searchwater is a basic resource that guarantees the life of all living beings on the planet. however its scarcity and pollution cause millions of people to have poor access to this much needed asset. although there are water treatment processes such as drinking water treatment or desalination that facilitate its treatment use and consumption in areas with quality or supply problems it is first necessary to avoid its contamination. in this video we show you what are the main causes and effects of water pollution. humans are the main cause of water pollution which is triggered in many ways by the dumping of industrial waste due to temperature rise that cause the alteration of water by reducing the oxygen in its composition or due to deforestation which causes sediments and bacteria to appear under the soil and therefore contaminate groundwater. in the same way the pesticides used in agricultural fields filter through underground channels and reach the consumption networks and also as a result of accidental spillage of oil. what are the main consequences of water pollution firstly the disappearance of biodiversity and aquatic ecosystems. also humans are harmed by the alteration in the food chain and by contracting illnesses when drinking or using contaminated water. as you can see water pollution has a great impact in the environment. for all this we must ensure water availability its sustainable management and sanitation for all as reflected in the sixth of the sustainable development goals adopted by the united nations in the agenda. after reading this article lets see if you really understood what causes pollution in rivers and seas. what pollutes water and what doesn t discard the wrong options related posts... and stay informed with the latest news on innovation. en cumplimiento del reglamento ue de proteccin de datos y dems normativa vigente en materia de proteccin de datos se le informa de que sus datos de carcter personal sern tratados por acciona s. a. con los siguientes datos identificativos nif a direccin avenida de europa parque empresarial de la moraleja de alcobendas tel email protecciondedatos acciona. com con la finalidad de atender sus comentarios y gestionar sus consultas solicitudes reclamaciones o sugerencias as como el envo por medios electrnicos de informacin sobre nuestros servicios y productos a travs del correo electrnico de contacto. la base jurdica para el tratamiento de los datos es el consentimiento del usuario al comunicarse con nosotros. los datos se conservarn mientras se mantenga la relacin y no se solicite su supresin y en cualquier caso nunca durante un plazo superior a doce meses. en caso de que su peticin no sea dirigida a acciona sino a una entidad que forma parte del grupo acciona sta comunicar los datos a la sociedad del grupo que pueda atender su solicitud de servicio o informacin de forma ms eficiente. en este sentido la comunicacin de estos datos puede constituir una transferencia internacional por estar estas empresas ubicadas en pases fuera del territorio de la unin europea para poder atender las necesidades de comunicacin entre las personas que forman parte del grupo a nivel mundial.. la aceptacin de los trminos de la privacidad supone el consentimiento para la transferencia internacional de sus datos necesaria para la correcta tramitacin de su peticin. no estn previstas otras cesiones de datos salvo obligacin legal. el interesado puede ejercitar sus derechos de acceso rectificacin supresin portabilidad y la limitacin u oposicin ante acciona s. a. dirigindose por escrito al departamento de proteccin de datos sita en avenida de europa de alcobendas o mediante el envo de un correo electrnico en la siguiente direccin protecciondedatos acciona. com adjuntando en ambos casos copia del dni u otro documento identificativo. asimismo podr en cualquier momento retirar el consentimiento prestado dirigindose a la direccin arriba indicada as como reclamar ante la autoridad de control. para ms informacin ponemos a su disposicin la poltica de privacidad de la pgina. sustainability is understood as the development that meets the present needs without compromising the capacities of future generations ensuring the balance between economic growth environmental care and social welfare. in sustainability for all we promote the awareness and difussion of good practices that allow to combine economic and social development with the preservation of natural resources. about us you currently have javascript disabled in your web browser please enable javascript to view our website as intended. here are the instructions of how to enable javascript in your browser. figure b. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including water vapour carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide absorb heat energy and emit it in all directions keeping earth s surface and lower atmosphere warm. adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere enhances the effect making earth s surface and lower atmosphere even warmer. image based on a figure from us epa. the sun serves as the primary energy source for earth s climate. some of the incoming sunlight is reflected directly back into space especially by bright surfaces such as ice and clouds and the rest is absorbed by the surface and the atmosphere. much of this absorbed solar energy is re emitted as heat. the atmosphere in turn absorbs and re radiates heat some of which escapes to space. any disturbance to this balance of incoming and outgoing energy will affect the climate. for example small changes in the output of energy from the sun will affect this balance directly. if all heat energy emitted from the surface passed through the atmosphere directly into space earth s average surface temperature would be tens of degrees colder than today. greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including water vapour carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide act to make the surface much warmer than this because they absorb and emit heat energy in all directions keeping earth s surface and lower atmosphere warm. without this greenhouse effect life as we know it could not have evolved on our planet. adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere makes it even more effective at preventing heat from escaping into space. when the energy leaving is less than the energy entering earth warms until a new balance is established. greenhouse gases emitted by human activities alter earth s energy balance and thus its climate. humans also affect climate by changing the nature of the land surfaces and through the emission of pollutants that affect the amount and type of particles in the atmosphere. scientists have determined that when all human and natural factors are considered earth s climate balance has been altered towards warming with the biggest contributor being increases in co. figure b. measurements of atmospheric co since from the mauna loa observatory in hawaii and from the south pole show a steady annual increase in atmospheric co concentration. the measurements are made at remote places like these because they are not greatly influenced by local processes so therefore they are representative of the background atmosphere. the small up and down saw tooth pattern reflects seasonal changes in the release and uptake of co by plants. source scripps co program the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide have increased significantly since the industrial revolution began. in the case of carbon dioxide the average concentration measured at the mauna loa observatory in hawaii has risen from parts per million in to more than ppm in. the same rates of increase have since been recorded at numerous other stations worldwide. since preindustrial times the atmospheric concentration of co has increased by over methane has increased by more than and nitrous oxide has increased by roughly. more than half of the increase in co has occurred since. increases in all three gases contribute to warming of earth with the increase in co playing the largest role. see page b to learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. figure b. co variations during the past years obtained from analysis of air trapped in an ice core extracted from antarctica show a sharp rise in atmospheric co starting in the late century. modern atmospheric measurements from mauna loa are superimposed in gray. source figure by eric wolff data from etheridge et al. macfarling meure et al. scripps co program. scientists have examined greenhouse gases in the context of the past. analysis of air trapped inside ice that has been accumulating over time in antarctica shows that the co concentration began to increase significantly in the century after staying in the range of to ppm for the previous years. ice core records extending back years show that during that time co concentrations remained within the range of to ppm throughout many ice age cycles learn about the ice ages and no concentration above ppm is seen in ice core records until the past years. measurements of the forms of carbon in the modern atmosphere show a clear fingerprint of the addition of old carbon coming from the combustion of fossil fuels. in addition it is known that human activities currently emit an estimated billion tonnes of carbon each year mostly by burning fossil fuels which is more than enough to explain the observed increase in concentration. these and other lines of evidence point conclusively to the fact that the elevated co concentration in our atmosphere is the result of human activities. figure b. earth s global average surface temperature has risen as shown in this plot of combined land and ocean measurements from to derived from three independent analyses of the available data sets. the top panel shows annual average values from the three analyses and the bottom panel shows decadal average values including the uncertainty range for the maroon dataset. the temperature changes are relative to the global average surface temperature averaged from. source based on ipcc ar data from the hadcrut dataset noaa climate. gov data from uk met office hadley centre us national aeronautics and space administration goddard institute for space studies and us national oceanic and atmospheric administration national centers for environmental information. estimating global average surface air temperature increase requires careful analysis of millions of measurements from around the world including from land stations ships and satellites. despite the many complications of synthesising such data multiple independent teams have concluded separately and unanimously that global average surface air temperature has risen by about c since. although the record shows several pauses and accelerations in the increasing trend each of the last four decades has been warmer than any other decade in the instrumental record since. going further back in time before accurate thermometers were widely available temperatures can be reconstructed using climate sensitive indicators proxies in materials such as tree rings ice cores and marine sediments. comparisons of the thermometer record with these proxy measurements suggest that the time since the early s has been the warmest year period in at least eight centuries and that global temperature is rising towards peak temperatures last seen to years ago in the warmest part of our current interglacial period. many other impacts associated with the warming trend have become evident in recent years. arctic summer sea ice cover has shrunk dramatically. the heat content of the ocean has increased. global average sea level has risen by approximately cm since due both to the expansion of warmer ocean water and to the addition of melt waters from glaciers and ice sheets on land. warming and precipitation changes are altering the geographical ranges of many plant and animal species and the timing of their life cycles. in addition to the effects on climate some of the excess co in the atmosphere is being taken up by the ocean changing its chemical composition. based just on the physics of the amount of energy that co absorbs and emits a doubling of atmospheric co concentration from pre industrial levels would by itself cause a global average temperature increase of about c. in the overall climate system however things are more complex warming leads to further effects that either amplify or diminish the initial warming. the most important feedbacks involve various forms of water. a warmer atmosphere generally contains more water vapour. water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas thus causing more warming its short lifetime in the atmosphere keeps its increase largely in step with warming. thus water vapour is treated as an amplifier and not a driver of climate change. higher temperatures in the polar regions melt sea ice and reduce seasonal snow cover exposing a darker ocean and land surface that can absorb more heat causing further warming. another important but uncertain feedback concerns changes in clouds. warming and increases in water vapour together may cause cloud cover to increase or decrease which can either amplify or dampen temperature change depending on the changes in the horizontal extent altitude and properties of clouds. the latest assessment of the science indicates that the overall net global effect of cloud changes is likely to be to amplify warming. the ocean moderates climate change. the ocean is a huge heat reservoir but it is difficult to heat its full depth because warm water tends to stay near the surface. the rate at which heat is transferred to the deep ocean is therefore slow it varies from year to year and from decade to decade and it helps to determine the pace of warming at the surface. observations of the sub surface ocean are limited prior to about but since then warming of the upper m is readily apparent and deeper warming is also clearly observed since about. surface temperatures and rainfall in most regions vary greatly from the global average because of geographical location in particular latitude and continental position. both the average values of temperature rainfall and their extremes are also strongly affected by local patterns of winds. estimating the effects of feedback processes the pace of the warming and regional climate change requires the use of mathematical models of the atmosphere ocean land and ice built upon established laws of physics and the latest understanding of the physical chemical and biological processes affecting climate and run on powerful computers. models vary in their projections of how much additional warming to expect but all such models agree that the overall net effect of feedbacks is to amplify warming. rigorous analysis of all data and lines of evidence shows that most of the observed global warming over the past years or so can not be explained by natural causes and instead requires a significant role for the influence of human activities. in order to discern the human influence on climate scientists must consider many natural variations that affect temperature precipitation and other aspects of climate from local to global scale on timescales from days to decades and longer. one natural variation is the el nio southern oscillation an irregular alternation between warming and cooling in the equatorial pacific ocean that causes significant year to year regional and global shifts in temperature and rainfall patterns. volcanic eruptions also alter climate in part increasing the amount of small particles in the stratosphere that reflect or absorb sunlight leading to a short term surface cooling lasting typically about two to three years. over hundreds of thousands of years slow recurring variations in earth s orbit around the sun which alter the distribution of solar energy received by earth have been enough to trigger the ice age cycles of the past years. fingerprinting is a powerful way of studying the causes of climate change. different influences on climate lead to different patterns seen in climate records. this becomes obvious when scientists probe beyond changes in the average temperature of the planet and look more closely at geographical and temporal patterns of climate change. for example an increase in the sun s energy output will lead to a very different pattern of temperature change compared to that induced by an increase in co concentration. observed atmospheric temperature changes show a fingerprint much closer to that of a long term co increase than to that of a fluctuating sun alone. scientists routinely test whether purely natural changes in the sun volcanic activity or internal climate variability could plausibly explain the patterns of change they have observed in many different aspects of the climate system. these analyses have shown that the observed climate changes of the past several decades can not be explained just by natural factors. figure b. the amount and rate of warming expected for the century depends on the total amount of greenhouse gases that humankind emits. models project the temperature increase for a business as usual emissions scenario and aggressive emission reductions falling close to zero years from now. black is the modelled estimate of past warming. each solid line represents the average of different model runs using the same emissions scenario and the shaded areas provide a measure of the spread between the temperature changes projected by the different models. all data are relative to a reference period of. source based on ipcc ar scientists have made major advances in the observations theory and modelling of earth s climate system and these advances have enabled them to project future climate change with increasing confidence. nevertheless several major issues make it impossible to give precise estimates of how global or regional temperature trends will evolve decade by decade into the future. firstly we can not predict how much co human activities will emit as this depends on factors such as how the global economy develops and how society s production and consumption of energy changes in the coming decades. secondly with current understanding of the complexities of how climate feedbacks operate there is a range of possible outcomes even for a particular scenario of co emissions. finally over timescales of a decade or so natural variability can modulate the effects of an underlying trend in temperature. taken together all model projections indicate that earth will continue to warm considerably more over the next few decades to centuries. if there were no technological or policy changes to reduce emission trends from their current trajectory then further globally averaged warming of. to. c in addition to that which has already occurred would be expected during the century. projecting what those ranges will mean for the climate experienced at any particular location is a challenging scientific problem but estimates are continuing to improve as regional and local scale models advance. share 